
Transcriber's note: Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
A caret character is used to denote superscription: a bracketed group
following the caret is superscripted (example: ^{16 88} - these are page
number references in the original). Page numbers enclosed by curly braces
(example: {25}) have been incorporated to facilitate the use of these
references and the Index.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW YORK OBELISK

Cleopatra's Needle

_WITH A PRELIMINARY SKETCH OF THE HISTORY
ERECTION, USES, AND SIGNIFICATION
OF OBELISKS_


BY

CHARLES E. MOLDENKE, A.M., PH.D.


NEW YORK

ANSON D. F. RANDOLPH AND CO.

38 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET

1891




_Copyright_, 1891,
BY CHARLES E. MOLDENKE.

University Press:
PRESSWORK BY
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.

{iii}TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  Chapter I. Obelisks--where found, and when, and by whom
    erected.                                                           1-11

        §1. The present site of obelisks. 1-5.
        §2. By whom obelisks were erected. 5-7.
        §3. By whom obelisks were ransported. 7-8.
        §4. List of obelisks. 8-11.
          I. Erect Obelisks. 9-10. II. Prostrate Obelisks. 10-11.

  Chapter II. The quarrying, transporting, and raising of obelisks.   12-17

        §1. How obelisks were quarried. 12-15.
        §2. How obelisks were transported. 15-17.
        §3. How obelisks were raised. 17.

  Chapter III. The form, name, dimensions, invention, material,
    and use of obelisks.                                              18-25

        §1. The form of the obelisk and the pyramidion. 18-21.
        §2. The derivation of the name "obelisk". 21-22.
        §3. The dimensions of obelisks. 22-23.
        §4. The material of obelisks. 23-24.
        §5. The invention of obelisks and the use they were put to.
                                                            24-25.

  Chapter IV. The signification of the obelisk and the worship
    of the sun.                                                       26-34

  Chapter V. The history of the New York Obelisk, and its removal
    from Alexandria.                                                  35-45

        §1. History of the New York Obelisk. 35-40.
        §2. The removal of the obelisk to New York City. 40-45.

  Chapter VI. The inscriptions of the New York Obelisk.               46-78

        I. Inscriptions of Thothmes III. 46-61.
          The Pyramidion. 46-55. The Obelisk Proper. 56-61.
        II. Inscriptions of Ramses II. 62-71.                        {iv}
          Vertical columns. 62-70. The base. 71.
        III. Inscriptions of Osarkon I. 71-72.
        IV. Inscriptions of Augustus. 72-74.
        The full translation of the obelisk. 74-78.

  Chapter VII. Notes on the translation and the crabs.                79-83

        §1. Arabic and other translations of the New York Obelisk.
                                                            79-81.
        §2. The crabs of the obelisk and the inscriptions on them.
                                                            81-83.

  Chapter VIII. Egypt: its geographical divisions and its cities.     84-92

        Upper Egypt. 84-90.
        Lower Egypt. 90-92.

  A Glossary of names and terms occurring in this book and
    pertaining to Egyptological subjects.                            93-154

        List of the Egyptian dynasties. 108-111.
        The Coptic alphabet. 113.
        The Demotic alphabet. 116.
        The Hieratic alphabet. 124.

  A Glossary of hieroglyphs occurring in this book, together
    with their pronunciation and determinative value.               155-173

  A Glossary of the Egyptian words occurring on the New York
    Obelisk.                                                        174-190

  Index of Proper Names.                                            191-202




{v}EXPLANATION OF THE VIGNETTES AT THE HEAD OF THE CHAPTERS.


  CHAPTER I. (Page 1.) The goddess of victory in the form of a vulture
  holding a flabellum or fan of feathers and a signet-ring in each claw.

  CHAPTER II. (Page 12.) The goddess Nekheb, the tutelary deity of kings,
  represented as a vulture carrying the Atef-crown on its head and holding
  a flabellum or fan of feathers and a signet-ring in each claw.

  CHAPTER III. (Page 18.) The winged Uræus-snake or cobra, the tutelary
  goddess of Upper and Lower Egypt.

  CHAPTER IV. (Page 26.) The symbol of the god Horus of Edfu, represented
  as the winged disk of the sun encircled by two Uræus-snakes or cobras.

  CHAPTER V. (Page 35.) Ancient Alexandria reconstructed.




{vii}PREFATORY.


The oldest nation on the globe sends her greeting to her youngest sister.
The "Setting Sun" has shed its last rays on the Old World from Egypt's
sunny land and now appears on this western shore as a brilliant "Rising
Sun". In the metropolis of the Western Hemisphere one of Egypt's grandest
treasures meets our eyes and, though silent, reminds us of her former
greatness. Here stands a monument of two of her greatest Pharaohs, lords
and conquerors, scourges of their people, and a terror to their foes. It
tells the story of serfs and teems with cringing words and the praise of
despots. Yet it was a glorious time when this monument was erected and
inscribed, a time of power, pride, learning, greatness, conquest for the
lords, but for the people a time of abject subjection, misery, and
hardships. Pharaoh was master of all. But the sun of his grandeur has set
and vanished, and our obelisk, that proud monument of Pharaonic times, now
sees a spectacle which the greatest flight of fancy could not have pictured
to any man of those by-gone days.

Here in the western land the obsequious adoration of one man is no more.
Here the people are not under the lash and miserable; they are, with all
their cares and labors, a happy and contented people. The realm is not, as
in those former days, the result of a despot's triumphant march, but a
grand, harmonious union of friends.

{viii}On such a picture our obelisk looks down from its lofty pedestal. Had
it a tongue, it could tell us many a tale of the past, when Thothmes III.
erected it with pomp and festivities, when Ramses II. engraved his name
upon it, and the law-giver Moses, the Israelite, played and studied in its
view, how it escaped the fury of the demoniac ravager Cambyses, was
transported by the Romans to Alexandria, escaped Mohammedan fanaticism, and
was at last conveyed as a precious prize from its sunny home to our fitful
climate. It seems oddly out of place here, and its coat of paraffine will
not protect it wholly from bleak winds and rain, and winter's ice and snow.
It has lived its longest time on earth, and at the advanced age of
thirty-four centuries it must decline, until it will totter and fall. Then
having so long symbolized the "Rising Sun" in all its beauty, and having
greeted its glorious advent with every dawn and break of day, the "Setting
Sun" will shroud it for the last time in its light, but the new sun of
morning will seek its old friend in vain. It will fade away, but its memory
will last much longer than inscriptions on stone which must perish sooner
or later. Let us, however, the children of a new era, learn from it the
greatness of its authors!

{1}[Illustration]




CHAPTER I

OBELISKS--WHERE FOUND, AND WHEN, AND BY WHOM ERECTED.


§1. Obelisks have been found in various localities of the ancient Egyptian
empire. Possibly almost every city of some prominence will have boasted of
some, no matter how small, especially such cities as became for a time the
residence of the Pharaoh. They would also be placed in cities in which
grand temples had been erected for the worship of some prominent deity, and
if we can rely upon the reports of travelers, they are even found in the
adjacent Sinaitic Peninsula to serve as monuments to the praise of some
king's achievements. Unfortunately, however, for any deductions, most of
the obelisks which were certainly erected in various places are completely
gone either through the violence of foes, the ravages of a Cambyses, or
else the internal dissensions of the people and the subsequent ruin, and
the ruthless sand of the desert. Of the obelisks, which formerly must have
been counted by hundreds, we can scarcely find fifty, and of these only a
few are perfect or of purely Egyptian origin.

As far as can be ascertained from the obelisks of the present day, most of
them point as the original place of their erection to that city
preëminently called the "City of Obelisks" in Lower Egypt, the Heliopolis
of the ancients, at present [Arabic: MTRYH] _Matariyeh_, near Cairo. They
were here placed around and in front of the temple of the sun, {2}which was
the principal sanctuary of the city. From this fact Heliopolis received the
name "house of the sun", or [Hebrew: BEIT SHEMESH] [bêth shêmesh], as
mentioned in the Bible. These obelisks formed the leading attraction at
that remote time and undoubtedly remained such until the city's utter
destruction. Their fame spread far and wide, for in Jeremiah xliii:13 we
find the prophet mentioning the "upright stones" [[Hebrew: MATSVWOT]
mazzebhôth] of Heliopolis, which were doomed to perish. Heliopolis, in the
days of its power, must have presented a glorious picture to the observer,
no less when Joseph wedded a daughter of the high-priest, as when, some
centuries later, the law-giver Moses was a student at Egypt's foremost
university in this city.

Another city, however, claims our attention as on an almost equal footing
with Heliopolis as regards obelisks. Thebes in Upper Egypt, the famous city
of one hundred gates, as Homer calls it, the largest city of the ancient
world, had besides its many grand temples and palaces a number of the
largest obelisks extant. Four of them still tower above the piles of ruins
scattered on all sides, while a still larger number must lie buried deep in
the ground. It was quite appropriate that here in the metropolis of Upper
Egypt, where Pharaoh passed much of his time and where he was crowned with
all the pomp and magnificence of a victor, a number of obelisks should
proclaim his praise. They were made for the living to gaze upon, and were
therefore erected on the eastern bank of the Nile where the city proper
stood, while the western bank was wholly surrendered to the dead. The
modern villages of Karnak ([Arabic: QRNAQ]) and Luxor ([Arabic: AQSR]) now
mark the spot where Thebes was situated. However, if we are to believe a
traveler, Villiers Stuart, who found two prostrate obelisks of an old
dynasty in the necropolis or cemetery on the western bank of the Nile, and
take into account that Lepsius found his obelisk at Gizeh, the necropolis
of Memphis, also on the western bank of the Nile, we must infer that the
oldest obelisks were not always set up with a view to being admired by the
living, but simply served as head-stones for the dead.

{3}[Illustration: Ruins of THEBES, at present KARNAK, in Upper Egypt.]

{4}[Illustration: Obelisk of Ramses II. in Luxor (Thebes).]

The majority of all extant obelisks was erected at Heliopolis and Thebes.
Others, however, have been discovered in different places: some as far
north as Saïs and Tanis, and as far south as the boundary of Egypt on the
island of Philæ, called Elephantinê by the ancients. The limit in the
opposite directions seems to have been the Fayoom on the west, and the
Sinaitic Peninsula on the east. Outside of Egypt and Africa other Egyptian
and some pseudo-Egyptian obelisks are to be found. They {5}are the work of
Roman emperors. These, jealous of the great achievements of the Pharaohs
and desirous of adding to the many Pharaonic obelisks in Rome some of their
own making and inscribed with their own name, had the stone quarried in
Syene and transported to Rome. Domitian and Hadrian erected such to their
honor in the "Eternal City".

§2. The obelisk is certainly a very early invention of the Egyptians. As a
matter of fact, it was at first of small size and could hardly have been
used as an ornament of temples, which purpose it served in later times. We
find very little of the commonplace laudatory titles on the earliest
specimens of obelisks, and, as mentioned above, some of them were even
found in the necropolis or cemetery, apparently to serve as mementos or
head-stones. A passage on the monuments, mentioning that a certain Merab
([glyphs] "_love-heart_") was priest of Khufu's obelisk, points to the
fact, that as early as the fourth dynasty (about 3100 B. C.) the form of
the obelisk was known. In the inscriptions of the fifth dynasty we meet
with the hieroglyphic sign of the obelisk [glyphs]. The XIth dynasty has
bequeathed to us three obelisks. It was not, however, until the XIIth
dynasty that the true beauty of the obelisk was fully appreciated.
Usertesen I. (2371 B. C., according to Lepsius) may be considered to have
been the first to erect obelisks of large dimensions, as is well
illustrated by the obelisk at present standing in Matarîyeh near Cairo,
though another of his obelisks at Bejij, or the ancient Crocodilopolis, in
the Fayoom has more of the appearance of a stelé with a rounded top.

From this time until the beginning of the XVIIIth dynasty we possess no
obelisks. A new era then began for Egypt. It ushered in its golden age.
Thothmes I. was the first to claim for himself equal honor with Usertesen.
{6}He erected two magnificent obelisks in Karnak, where they are still
conspicuous. Here his daughter, queen Hatasu, co-regent with her brothers
Thothmes II. and III., also erected two obelisks. It is true her name does
not appear on them, but it is a well established fact, that her great
brother Thothmes III., mighty as he was, showed an ignoble jealousy of his
valiant sister and, on coming to power, erased her name from the monuments
and substituted his own instead. As he had, however, left the feminine
pronouns and endings in the inscriptions, his knavery was readily
discovered. Notwithstanding this serious defect in his character, he
celebrated his many victories by the erection of obelisks of his own. To
him belongs the palm in this line of monumental structures. Besides him,
one other Pharaoh of this dynasty, Amenophis II., seems to have erected one
small obelisk.

[Illustration: Queen HATASU or MAKARA.]

After the death of Thothmes III. there was a comparative quiet in the
erection of obelisks, although one of his obelisks was finished, inscribed,
and then erected by Thothmes IV. The great Pharaoh was praised for his
imposing monuments, but none dared emulate him until with a new dynasty a
new line of rulers came to Egypt. Of Seti I. two excellent obelisks have
come down to us, {7}both being at present in Rome. The name, however, most
frequently mentioned on the obelisks is that of Ramses II. (1200 B. C.).
Although he erected comparatively few obelisks, he inscribed his name and
deeds on those of his predecessors, thereby engaging in no legitimate
business. He considered himself the equal of Thothmes III., and therefore
chose the obelisks of the latter, which had but one--the central--column
inscribed, and put two more columns on each side with vainglorious praise
of himself. With him the erection of large obelisks seems to have ceased
for a time.

[Illustration: Ramses II. in his youth.]

It was not until the reign of king Psametik II. that we come across another
large obelisk of superior workmanship. This is at present in Rome. Ptolemy
Euergetes II. and Cleopatra II. have left us a fine obelisk on the island
of Philæ, and this represents the last of a long line of truly Egyptian
monoliths. The Roman emperors who erected obelisks of their own were
Hadrian and Domitian. Since their time obelisks with hieroglyphic
inscriptions have neither been quarried nor erected.

§3. It fell to the lot of the greater number of Egyptian obelisks to be
transported from their native land and to serve as objects of curiosity to
the multitudes, which had and still have no conception of what they
represent. This was due to foreigners; for there is no case on record where
the obelisk of one Pharaoh has been transported to a different place by
another. Not until the Romans invaded Egypt and carried off its grain and
gold, did it occur to {8}man's mind to despoil it of some of its wonders.
The first to adorn Rome and Alexandria with them was the emperor Augustus,
who carried off two to Rome and left two in Alexandria,--the London and New
York Obelisks. Caligula (40 A. D.) and Claudius (41-54 A. D.) followed his
example, and about 90 A. D. Domitian removed two to Rome and two to
Benevento in Italy. Constantine the Great (306--337 A. D.), after
establishing himself in Byzantium [Constantinople], transported a large
obelisk to this city, but left a second one, which he had begun to remove
in 330, in Alexandria, until Constantius brought it over to Constantinople
in 357. During the Middle Ages and up to the present century the other
obelisks still remaining in Egypt were left undisturbed. In 1832-1833 the
French removed the Luxor Obelisk to Paris, the English the prostrate
Alexandrian Obelisk in 1877-1878 to London, and the Americans the erect
Obelisk of Alexandria, commonly called "_Cleopatra's Needle_" in 1880-1881
to New York.

[Illustration: Head of the mummy of Ramses II. discovered in 1881.]

§4. It would be quite impossible to give an absolutely {9}correct list of
all obelisks existing at the present time, since with regard to some of
them we must take the word of travelers, who were not acquainted with
Egyptian studies and would therefore easily have been imposed upon, or else
the books of reference describing them are in some cases very much at
variance. The following list is as near correct as it can at present be
made.


I. ERECT OBELISKS.

                       Where erected:       By whom erected:    Height:
  _In Egypt_:

   1. Karnak              Thebes             Thothmes I.       71 ft. 7 in.
   2. Karnak              Thebes             Hatasu            97 "   6 "
   3. Luxor               Thebes             Ramses II.        82 "   - "
   4. Heliopolis          Heliopolis         Usertesen I.      67 "   - "
   5. Philæ [frag.]       Philæ              Ptolemies         33 "   - "
   6. 7. Karnak           Thebes             Thothmes III.     19 "   - "
   8. Sarbut-el-Khedem[?] Sinaitic Peninsula    ?                 ?
   9. Drah-abul-Neggah    Thebes             Antef [XI. dyn.]  11 "   - "

  _In Constantinople_:

  10. Atmeidan            Heliopol. ?        Thothmes III.     55 "   4 "
  11. Prioli                 ?               Nectanebo I. ?    35 "   - "

  _In Rome_:

  12. Lateran             Thebes             Th'th. III. IV.  105 "   6 "
  13. Vatican             _not inscribed._                     83 "  1½ "
  14. Flaminian           Heliopolis         Seti I.           78 "   6 "
  15. Campensis           Heliopolis         Psametik II. ?    71 "   5 "
  16. Pamphilian          Rome               Domitian          54 "   3 "
  17. S^a. Maria Magg.    Heliopol. ?        _not inscribed._  48 "   5 "
  18. Mt. Cavallo         Heliopol. ?        _not inscribed._  45 "   - "
  19. Sallustian          Rome               _Copy of Seti I._ 43 "   6 "
  20. Barberini           Rome               Hadrian           30 "   - "
  21. Mahutean            Heliopolis         Ramses II.        20 "   - "
  22. Piazza della        Sais?              Psametik II.?     17 "   7 "
        Minerva
  23. Villa Mattei           ?               Ramses II.         8 "   3 "

  _In other parts of Italy and Sicily_:

  24. Boboli Gardens,     Heliopolis         Ramses II.?       16 "   1 "
        Florence
  25. Florence               ?                  ?               7 "   - "
  26. Florence               ?                  ?               5 "  10 "
  27. 28. Benevento       Benevento          Domitian           9 "   - "
  29. Borgian, Naples        ?               Domitian?          6 "   7 "
  30. Catania             Catania            _Roman copy?_     12 "   4 "

  _In France_:

  31. Luxor, [Paris]      Thebes             Ramses II.        74 "  11 "
  32. Arles               Arles              Constantine?      56 "   9 "

  _In England_:

  33. Alexandrian         Heliopolis         Thothmes III.     68 "  5½ "
        [in London]
  34. Alnwick Castle         ?               Amenophis II.      7 "   3 "
        or Sion House?
  35. 36. Amyrtæus           ?               Amyrtæus [465]    19 "   9 "
            British Mus.
  37. Corfe Castle        Philæ              Ptol. Euerg. II.  22 "  1½ "

  _In Germany_:

  38. Albani Munich          ?               Domitian?            ?
  39. Lepsius Berlin      Memphis            IV. or V. dyn.     2 "  1½ "

  _In the United States_:

  40. Cleopatra's         Heliopolis         Thothmes III.     69 "   6 "
        Needle

II. PROSTRATE OBELISKS.

   1. Karnak              Thebes             Thothmes I.          ?
   2. Karnak              Thebes             Hatasu               ?
   3. Bejij               Crocodilop.        Usertesen I.      42 "   9 "
   4-7. Sân               Tanis              Ramses II.           ?
   8. Assuân              _still in the quarry._               95 "   - "
   9. Nahasb              Sinaitic              ?               7 "  11 "
                          Peninsula
  10. 11. Drah-abul-Neggah  Thebes           Antef [XI. dyn.]     ?

Besides the above, we are told that there were in Rome in 1676 four
fragments of obelisks, which have since disappeared. Another obelisk is
said to have been near the Porta del Popolo in Rome, in the burial place of
Nero, which was only a Roman imitation, called the Esmeade Obelisk. Zoëga
states that a fragment of an obelisk was brought to Wanstead, England. It
was 2½ ft. high, and comprised only a part of the pyramidion. Another
fragment of an obelisk is mentioned as having been at Cairo, Egypt. Bonomi
calls attention to one at Soughton Hall, England. None of these, however,
can now be traced.

[Illustration: Pharaoh with the double crown of Egypt bringing offerings to
the gods.]




{12}[Illustration]




CHAPTER II

THE QUARRYING, TRANSPORTING, AND RAISING OF OBELISKS.


§1. Egypt is undoubtedly in every respect a land of wonders. At the most
remote period of its history we observe that it was already in such an
advanced state of civilization, as would appear to us to be wholly
incompatible with its venerable age. When Greece first began to issue from
its times of heroes and demi-gods and advance on a path of civilization,
Egypt had already for at least twenty centuries possessed everything that
enlightened Greece could boast of. The first objects among the many wonders
that still remain in Egypt to catch the eye of a traveler, are the grand
monuments set up in honor of various divinities or as proud guide-posts for
future generations. Among these obelisks and pyramids rank first. We marvel
at the enormous stones which our modern steam-engines would lift with
difficulty, yet which the ancient Egyptians quarried, transported, and
erected in their proper places, not only setting them on the ground, but
even lifting them some hundred feet, as in the case of the Pyramids. We
look upon the greater number of obelisks, each made of one unbroken piece
of stone, and are forced to admire the workmanship and engineering skill
which they exhibit. We may endeavor to grasp this wonderful achievement,
but must continually ask: how was it done, and how was it possible to do so
at that time, when even now with all our many inventions and
{13}contrivances we should perhaps fail. Unfortunately we receive no
definite answer. It is so long ago since the Egyptian stone-cutters plied
their chisels and the engineers built their machines, and no papyrus or
inscription tells us directly how the work was accomplished. A relic of
indomitable labor and uncompleted work still lies in the quarry at Assuan.
It is an obelisk of 95 feet still cleaving on its fourth side to the native
rock. This may throw some light on the mystery.

We notice the nicety and precision with which the stone-cutter went to work
in hewing out and polishing the monument. His art was one that had been
brought to the highest state of perfection in Egypt; and no wonder, for in
a country where timber was scarce and hardly one tree was suitable for
wood-work, men had to fall back on their natural supply which the mountains
rising on both sides of the valley yielded. Stone was there in abundance.
Hence from the earliest times of Egyptian history the stone-cutter receives
a prominent place. The implements he employed must have had a wonderful
degree of hardness to chip and polish the tenacious rock of Syene.

With regard to the quarrying of the rock, that is, how, after having
selected a properly-sized piece of rock without a flaw and having carefully
marked it, the stone-cutters were able to detach 50-100 feet of it without
a break--that has given rise to many conjectures. Belzoni held, that after
a groove of about two inches had been cut along the line, the blow of some
machine must have separated the pieces of rock, as glass when cut by a
diamond. Others believe that a saw was employed to sever the rock. Sir J.
F. Herschel prefers to accept the theory that the separation of the rocks
was caused by fire, a method still employed in India. He calls attention to
the fact, that after the workmen there have cut a groove into the rock they
kindle a small fire on top of this line, and that {14}after the rock is
thoroughly heated they suddenly pour cold water on it, causing the rock to
split with a clean fracture. It is, however, more probable that the
Egyptians made use of wooden wedges to accomplish their purpose. We
frequently find not only grooves in the rock but also wedge-holes inside
these grooves. Wedges with their slow and steady pressure would insure a
good fracture. Possibly, as Wilkinson surmises, the grooves themselves may
have carried water to the wooden wedges which, being kept continually moist
and thereby expanding, would have caused the rock to split. The saw was
undoubtedly used for the last cutting to separate the piece from the native
rock.

[Illustration: Stone-cutters smoothing a block of granite.]

[Illustration: Stone-cutter at work.]

The blocks having been quarried, the stone-cutters cut them exactly to the
required shape and polished them almost as smooth as glass with the chisel
and incessant rubbing. The accompanying pictures fully illustrate and
explain this. In the accurate chiseling and planing of the angles the
Egyptians have never been surpassed. As for the material used in the
manufacture of the tools that were to cut the hard Egyptian rock which
bends even our iron and steel tools of to-day and makes {15}them useless,
we must profess a deep ignorance. Either the Egyptians employed chemical
compounds and emery, or else they possessed a wonderful knowledge of
tempering bronze and iron tools which has been completely lost. It still
remains for our advanced civilization to rediscover what the ancient
Egyptians already knew.

[Illustration: Chiseling, planing, polishing, and inscribing statues.]


[Illustration: Transportation of a colossus.]

§2. We know almost less about the transportation than the quarrying of
obelisks. We have only one picture on the monuments, at Bersheh, to guide
us. In this the dragging of a colossus by workmen is represented in vivid
outlines. The accompanying picture shows the man in charge of the work, the
servant greasing the runners of the sledge, and the multitude of toiling
people, but it {16}tells us very little about the manner of transportation
for a distance of more than one thousand miles between Syene and Lower
Egypt. That the removal of such monoliths from the quarry to the place of
erection was a matter of some importance is fully brought out by many
inscriptions, where this task is intrusted by Pharaoh to a loyal subject,
and where the latter expresses his gratification that his mission was
completed to the satisfaction of his master, who rewarded him quite
handsomely. From some inscriptions it would appear that the blocks, when
ready for transportation, were rolled to the river's edge, or perhaps
placed on rollers and then pushed or else dragged down on an inclined
plane. The Nile, ever ready to extend his welcome help to the children of
his soil, aided them again in their efforts. Large barges or rather floats
were built where the water of the inundation would reach the blocks, and
where they, when once on the floats, would be carried on that great
Egyptian highway to any part of the vast empire. Many monuments, however,
were transported overland, in which case the aid of the Nile must have been
dispensed with. The Colossi at Thebes, the two statues of Amenophis III.,
and the statue of Ramses II. in the Memnonium at Thebes, which weighed as
much as 1,800,000 pounds, are instances of this. Such masses of rock were
moved along on sledges by human hands, as shown in the above picture. The
inscription of Hammamât makes mention of the men who died while handling
such sledges with their enormous loads. Possibly the Egyptians already used
besides rollers and levers also pulleys to facilitate their work. At all
events the transportation by human hands of obelisks and other monoliths of
enormous size and weight without the most powerful appliances of modern
times is such a wonderful feat, that we cannot at present fully comprehend
it. All we know {17}for certain is the fact that those men of old have
succeeded, and therefore accomplished what we would regard as almost
impossible.

§3. The method employed by the Egyptians in the erection of obelisks has to
this day remained a profound mystery. Of course, just as with regard to the
quarrying and transporting them, many conjectures have been advanced which,
however plausible they may seem, give us no definite solution of this
problem. That the Egyptians must have possessed some mechanical means, with
which to lift these colossi into their exact place, cannot be disputed:
otherwise the time consumed in setting them up would have been equal to
that of quarrying them. They had undoubtedly some unknown facilities for
doing work of this kind, and being great mathematicians, they may have
constructed agents more powerful than those of the present day.




{18}[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

THE FORM, NAME, DIMENSIONS, INVENTION, MATERIAL, AND USE OF OBELISKS.


§1. Obelisks are monoliths, that is, they are made of _one_ piece of rock
only. Pieces set up in the form of an obelisk are never considered one. The
lofty shaft at Washington, D. C., cannot, therefore, be styled an obelisk.
In addition to being composed of one piece only, all obelisks are
quadrangular, the sides sloping gradually and perceptibly but right-angled
all the way to the top, where they are surmounted by a miniature pyramid or
trapezium. They were, as far as we know, commonly erected in pairs at the
entrance of the temples, evidently serving there in the capacity of
guardians. The stone was polished to a high state of perfection, and the
inscriptions added in intaglio-relievo by skilled stone-cutters under the
direction of scribes. Whether the figures of these inscriptions were filled
out with copper or gold, as some maintain, is extremely doubtful.

With the pyramidion it was different. While its usual dedicatory
inscriptions remained undoubtedly as they were chiseled, the point or apex
seems to have been surmounted by gold or gilded bronze. The sun would
naturally in the early morning first touch with its rays this point and
bathe it in splendor. It would appear from extant obelisks that, in order
to have the gold added, the {19}stone apex was not brought out to a fine
point, but left rugged and incomplete. Yet this unevenness may also have
been the result of time and the abrasion caused by the sand of the desert.
We know of the Obelisk of Karnak, erected by queen Hatasu, that the apex of
its pyramidion was covered with "pure gold", as the inscription on the
obelisk itself states. Others, again, were covered with copper; for
instance, the two obelisks of Heliopolis, of which but one remains now,
which were seen in this condition by St. Ephraim Syrus (308 A. D.), Denys
of Telmahre (840 A. D.), and a number of Arabic writers.

It is a very interesting fact, that in the inscriptions of the vth and vith
dynasties in Memphis the obelisk has a curious shape, being represented by
a short and singularly unproportional shaft on a high and wide pedestal,
and crowned at the point of the pyramidion by a large disk of the sun. This
figure, in the first place, closely resembles a pyramid or a combination of
the pyramid and the obelisk, almost forcing on us the assumption that the
obelisk grew out of the pyramid, and, in the second place, the disk of the
sun plainly refers to the mystic sun-worship for which the obelisk
primarily served as an index finger.

The sides of the obelisk were always intended to be inscribed, for they
were to record the deeds and praise of a Pharaoh. That some obelisks have
come down to our days without inscriptions is due to the fact, that the
monarch who ordered them died, and his successor either would not spend the
money on the monument of a predecessor to have it inscribed, or deemed it
sacrilegious to put his own name on what did not belong to him. We find
filial piety displayed only by Thothmes IV., who would not allow the
monument of his great predecessor, Thothmes III., to lie half-finished in
the {20}quarry, but erected it, not, however, without succumbing to the
sore temptation of adding his own name and using two thirds of the space of
the whole obelisk. This is at present the Lateran Obelisk in Rome. Whether
the obelisks were inscribed before being erected, or vice versa, cannot now
be determined. From some uninscribed specimens we should infer that they
were inscribed when in their proper position, while from the Lateran
Obelisk we could draw the conclusion that they were first completed in all
details before they were erected.

[Illustration: A pair of obelisks, on pedestals, in front of the pylon, or
entrance-gateway, of a temple.]

The obelisks, as soon as they had been finished to the satisfaction of
Pharaoh, were placed in pairs on pedestals in front of the pylons or lofty
entrances of the temples. The pedestals were either, as in the case of the
New York Obelisk, composed of one solid block of stone, or else of a
foundation of closely fitting blocks or a layer of stones.

One effect of the removal of the obelisks by the Romans was to break off
the edges at the bottom, so that {21}there was reason to fear that
re-erection would not make them safe. To obviate this danger, they placed
bronze crabs at each corner to fill out the gaps. Why they should have hit
upon the form of the crab or scorpion is not very evident. Perhaps they
chose the crab from a religious point of view, in order to conform to the
curious religious doctrines and superstitious notions entertained by the
Egyptians under the Ptolemies, and elucidated by the inscriptions and
papyri of that time.

§2. The word "obelisk" comes from the Greek signifying a "pointed
instrument", and is, in turn, derived from another Greek word _obelos_ "a
spit". Afterwards this name was applied to a "pointed pillar", on account
of the latter's resemblance to a spit. By the Egyptians the obelisk was
called [glyphs] _tekhen_. This word occurs quite frequently in
inscriptions, especially on the obelisks themselves, where the
"determinative" [glyphs] alone is given without the literal complement,
that is, the spelling.

The pyramidion of the obelisk, on the other hand, was called _benben_ by
the Egyptians. The prominent part played by it in the mysteries of
sun-worship is attested by the inscription of king Piankhi (about 700 B.
C.), for in it is mentioned the [glyphs] (_ha-t benben-t_), "the temple of
the pyramidion" in Heliopolis. The inscription tells us in this connection
the following story: "_His majesty entered the temple of Ra and his divine
sanctuary with profound veneration. The first high-priest offered up a
prayer to god in the star-chamber to ward off misfortune from the king,
placed on his brow the fillet, and purified him with frankincense and holy
water. Flowers of the temple of the pyramidion were brought to him and
blossoms were given to him. He ascended the stairs to the grand niche to
see the god Ra in the temple of the pyramidion. Such was done by the king
himself. His {22}chieftains stood apart, while he drew back the bolt,
opened the door, and saw his father Ra in the temple of the pyramidion
resting in the Maad-boat of Ra and the Sektet-boat of Tum. He then closed
the doors and put on them clay and sealed them with the king's own ring._"
The frequent mention of the pyramidion and the evident importance attached
by the king to his visit to this sanctuary plainly show that there was a
deep signification lying hidden beneath the strange upper part of the
obelisk. In it the Rising Sun, Râ, and the Setting Sun, Tum, find their
mutual points of contact.

§3. The dimensions of the obelisks which have come down to us vary very
much. By consulting the list on pages 9-11 it will be seen that at present
the height ranges between 2 to 105 feet. As has already been mentioned, the
largest obelisks date back to the time when Egypt entered upon, or was
already in, its golden age, that having been the time when the Pharaohs
could erect monuments worthy of their reign. Before that time, when they
served as grave-stones, the obelisks were of a comparatively small size.
Still we find some very large specimens under later dynasties, as for
instance that of Psametik II. on the Monte Citorio in Rome, which is 71
feet high, while that of the Ptolemies in Philæ, which is only a fragment,
measures 33 feet. The Romans also erected large monoliths, Domitian's
obelisk on the Piazza Navona in Rome being 54 feet, and that of Hadrian on
the Monte Pincio 30 feet high. Constantine the Great erected the large
obelisk at Arles in France, measuring 56 feet, which may have possibly been
taken out of a French quarry.

There must have been some fixed rule for determining the thickness of an
obelisk when the length was given. According to a measurement of all the
obelisks we may state, that the base was generally 1/9 to 1/11 of {23}the
entire length. Thus the New York Obelisk is 7 ft. 9¼ in. by 7 ft. 8¼ in. at
the base, which is about 1/9 of the entire length (69½ ft.). The obelisk of
Hatasu is of a somewhat different proportion, the thickness at the base
being only 1/13 of the total length. The obelisk with the thickest base is
that which is still in the quarry at Assuan, the base measuring 11 ft. 1½
in. by 11 ft. 1½ in.

That monuments of such height and thickness weigh a great deal is
self-evident. Our New York Obelisk would tip an adequate scale at the
figure: 448,000 pounds. Eight of the extant obelisks, however, weigh still
more, the heaviest being that of Assuan which, if it had ever been erected,
would weigh 1,540,000 pounds, having for a second the Lateran Obelisk in
Rome with 1,020,000 pounds.

§4. The material of which the obelisks are made is the granite of Syene. It
was preferred by the Egyptians on account of its wonderful hardness,
durability, lack of flaws (the so-called _maladie de granite_), and its
reddish color. It is really the amphibole-granite, but is commonly called
Syenite from the name of the place where it is found. Although flaws in it
are of rare occurrence, they nevertheless sometimes appear in the obelisks.
Whenever they were discovered after the block was detached from the native
rock, they did not render the stone by any means worthless, as the Luxor
Obelisk in Paris has proved. This had a crack in it at the base from the
day of its erection in Thebes, which, when pinned by the Egyptians with a
wooden plug at that early time, has not since then interfered in the least
with the strength or stability of the obelisk.

The supply of this hard granite was and is still inexhaustible, being
massed up in immense mountains in various parts of Egypt. It is found in
the eastern desert near Thebes. Egyptian monuments also record the
quarrying of stone at Hammamât, on the road to Kossêr. {24}It is, however,
found best in the vicinity of the First Cataract and, as the name "Syenite"
indicates, especially at Syene (Assuan). This city, of some importance
under the Pharaohs, was called Syêné by the Romans, and [glyphs] _Sun-t_ by
the Egyptians. It is situated opposite the island of Elephantine, called by
the Egyptians [glyphs] _Âbu-t_ ("the ivory-city"), the most northerly
island in the First Cataract, forming the southern boundary of ancient and
modern Egypt. Where the chisel and the tools of the stone-cutters were kept
in constant use, where men formerly battled with the stubborn rock, and
most of Egypt's monuments were cut and embellished--no sound now greets the
traveler. The place is deserted, itself a monument of an ancient people's
diligence and perseverance.

§5. The question as to the invention of that wonderful, simple, yet strange
figure we call obelisk, can be answered without hesitation. The invention
belongs wholly to the Egyptians. As has been pointed out before, the people
of the IVth and Vth dynasties already made use of this form of monument.
Perhaps its first appearance dates back even further, although no such old
obelisks exist to warrant this assumption.

The next question to be answered is: to what use were the obelisks put? The
ancient dynasties did not use them for ornament's sake, as the tomb would
hardly be a suitable place for works of art that were to be admired. They
originally served as memorial tablets and tomb-stones. Afterwards their
surpassing beauty as monuments of art was perceived, and they were placed
in pairs in front of the gates and pylons of the temples for ornament. They
broke the monotony of the straight and peculiar Egyptian style of building,
and by their apparently thin and column-like appearance set off to
{25}advantage the massive and ponderous structures round about. A position
in front of the temples was certainly the very best which could be assigned
to them, and it can therefore be no matter of surprise, that the Pharaoh
sought to commemorate his victories and virtues on such splendid tablets.
We find the king in most cases use all the available space on the obelisk,
and whenever he did not use all of it, another would be sure to add his own
glorious name and deeds to those of some predecessor. We consequently find
some obelisks that bear the inscriptions of as many as three different
rulers; for instance, the Lateran, London, and New York Obelisks. These
inscriptions would effectually serve the purpose of history, if they
recorded events of vast political importance, but, unfortunately, of
obelisk-inscriptions still extant, none are dated after the manner of other
historical monuments.

The Romans immediately recognized the artistic merits of the obelisks,
though they were perhaps more struck by their grandeur and elegance than
anything else, and carried off many of them as trophies to sunny Italy.
They adorned Rome with them, where, with all their rents and fractures, and
after all the injury by the hand of man and havoc of the elements, the
obelisks still baffle the ravages of time in the "City of the Seven Hills".
As a "smart" people, however, the Romans tried to utilize them in some way:
so they hit upon the idea to make them serve as sun-dials. Augustus
experimented to this end with the obelisk now on the Monte Citorio in Rome,
but, as he was not successful, this project was entirely abandoned.




{26}[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV

THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE OBELISK AND THE WORSHIP OF THE SUN.


The most interesting point to be touched upon in our further investigation
concerning obelisks is undoubtedly that with regard to their meaning and
signification, or, in other words, what the mind of the Egyptian priest saw
expressed under the figure of an obelisk. This leads us into the religion
and mythology of a nation that had some very lofty conceptions of life,
death, and eternity. The objects which called forth such thoughts were
pre-eminently the obelisk and the pyramid, the former representing life in
the sunshine of glory, the latter death in the darkness of passing night.

In the cosmogony of the Egyptians the Sun plays the most important part.
Its birth is thus aptly described from the monuments by Prof. Dr. H.
Brugsch: "_In the beginning there was no heaven or earth. A boundless
water, shrouded in dense darkness, made up the universe. This held in its
bosom the male and female germs or beginnings of the future world. The
divine primeval spirit, inseparable from the matter of the primitive water,
felt a longing after creative power, and his word called into being the
world, whose figure and variegated form had already manifested themselves
to him. Its corporeal outlines and colors corresponded, in consequence of
their derivation, to Truth, that is, to the exact intention of the divine
spirit with reference to his future work. The {27}first act of creation
consisted in the formation out of the primitive water of an egg, from which
the light of day (Ra 'the sun') proceeded, which animated everything in the
world. In this rising sun is embodied the almighty divinity in its grandest
manifestation_".

This new-born deity was destined to become greater than its parent, and to
receive adoration in all its many phases. The path of the sun was
frequently compared to the life of a man from infancy to old age. Hence the
sun was called a _boy_ in the morning, a _youth_ in the midday, and an _old
man_ in the evening ([glyphs] _khrud_ "boy", [glyphs] _hunnu_ "youth",
[glyphs] _aau_ "old man"). The most common names of the sun, however, which
constantly recur on the innumerable Egyptian monuments are [glyphs] _Ra_
and [glyphs] _Tum_, the former representing the sun in all its glory in the
morning and at noon, the latter the sun when it has completed [_tum_] its
course and leaves the earth in darkness. Thus the inscriptions frequently
speak of [glyphs] (_Ra em ubenef_) "Râ when he rises" [whence perhaps the
royal title in the stelé of Abusimbel: [glyphs] (_uben_) "the glorious
rising sun"], and of [glyphs] (_Tum em hotepef_) "Tum when he sets".

[Illustration: The sun-god RA.]

The obelisk was erected in honor of the sun in _all_ its phases, both when
rising and when about to set. The pyramids, on the other hand, symbolizing
the sun after it had set, were always built in the region of darkness and
death on the western bank of the Nile, and had only to do with Tum, the
setting sun. Here, in the domain {28}of Tum, the bodies of the departed
were to rest securely until the light of an eternal morning should wake
them again and endow them with the splendor of the rising sun, which also
set in the west, entered the lower regions and bowels of the earth or Hades
(the Egyptian [glyphs] _A-menti_), and again victoriously left its dark
dungeon to break forth in its usual glory.

[Illustration: The sun-god TUM.]


[Illustration: Kheper, the night-sun: winter solstice.]

[Illustration: Ra-Hor-Khuti, the morning-sun: vernal equinox.]



[Illustration: Tum, the evening-sun: autumnal equinox.]

[Illustration: Horus, the noon-sun: summer solstice.]


The various phases of the sun in its passage over the heavens are even
represented by pictures on the monuments. The sun of morning is pictured as
a hawk-faced deity (Horus) crowned with the snake-encircled disk of the
sun, called _Ra-Hor-Khuti_; {29}the sun of noon as the same deity wearing
the double crown of Egypt, called _Hor_ or _Hor-Khuti_; the sun of evening
as a human-faced deity with the double crown of Egypt, called _Tum_ or
_Atum_; and the invisible sun of night as a human-faced deity with the
sacred scarab above it, called _Kheper_ or _Ptah-Sokar-Osiris_. These four
deities also represented the beginning of the four seasons of the year: the
vernal equinox, the summer solstice, the autumnal equinox, and the winter
solstice. Some other names and forms under which the sun was worshiped are,
besides the above, _Amen-Ra_ (in Thebes), _Sebek-Ra_ (in Ombos), and
_Khnum-Ra_ (in Elephantine).


[Illustration: Sebek-Ra.]

[Illustration: Khnum-Ra.]


All this proves the vast and supreme importance attached to the sun by the
ancient Egyptians. But why should they have selected the sun as their
principal deity? All the pictures, in which the sun or the sun-god is
represented, give us the answer. On them it will be noticed that each deity
holds in one of its hands the sign [glyphs] (_ankh_) meaning "life", and in
a tomb at Tel-el-Amarna we find the sun represented with rays terminating
in human hands and touching the lips of Amenophis IV. and his wife with the
sign [glyphs]. As all nature receives its life from the light of the sun,
so all human beings obtain their life and their subsistence from the same
source. Therefore Pharaoh and his people would {30}turn to the heavenly orb
each day with prayer and adoration, asking of it the blessing and gift of
life here on earth, and the life to come in Amenti or Hades. The sun is to
them the giver of life, strength, health, existence, and all happiness. It
is for this reason, that the finest productions of the Egyptian scribes are
the grand hymns addressed to the sun, the tutelary god of Egypt.

[Illustration: Ra bestowing "life" on Amenophis IV. and his wife.]

Having called attention to the belief of the ancient Egyptians in the sun
as their guiding and illuminating deity, it will now be necessary to
consider the place the obelisk occupies with regard to it. The first thing
that greets our eyes on most obelisks is the figure of a bird on the top of
each column of hieroglyphs. This represents the god Horus in the form of a
sparrow-hawk ([glyphs]), and gives him the usual insignia, namely the crown
of Upper and Lower Egypt; thus, [glyphs]. Horus was a form or hypostasis of
Râ, the sun, in his midday power, and is often found in the mysterious
combination as Hor-Râ [glyphs] and Râ-Hor-Khuti [glyphs] or Hor-em-khuti
[glyphs].

Why did the Egyptians choose the hawk as the {31}embodiment of their
highest god? Perhaps on account of the lofty flight of the bird, or else
because of its keen vision. In the "victory-stelé" of Thothmes III. the
deity says to the king: [glyphs] [glyphs] [Pronounced: du·a ma sen hen·k em
neb dema·t thet em degag·t·f er merer·f] "_I let them behold your majesty
like the lord of flight_ (hawk), _grasping with his glance whatever he
desires_", thus combining in one verse the two explanations given above.
The grandest sanctuary in which Horus was worshiped was in Edfu, where he
was called [glyphs] Hor-Hud·t. Horus and Râ were generally united into one
deity and then represented as a hawk-faced man with the disk of the sun on
his head ([glyphs]). In order to proclaim this deity a ruler over the earth
as well as the heavens, the picture of the hawk frequently has the double
crown of Egypt ([glyphs] being the white crown--[glyphs] _hez_--of Upper
Egypt and the red crown--[glyphs] _desher_--of Lower Egypt) added to it
([glyphs]), to signify that Horus is the lord of the universe.

[Illustration: Horus of Edfu.]

In common with the belief of all the ancient nations, the king was
considered by the Egyptians not only as a mortal but also, by reason of his
exalted rank, as a god on earth. He was the essence of the divinity and
styled himself "the offspring of the gods" ([glyphs] _mes nuter·u_) or more
in particular "Râ's son" or "son of the sun" ([glyphs] _sa Ra_). Being or
pretending to be the sun's son, he demanded and received the homage of his
subjects as a {32}god. His person was inviolable, his command was absolute,
his power was unlimited. His first act each day was to offer up sacrifice
and prayer to his father, the sun, and impress this worship on his
subjects.

[Illustration: The king offering up libation to himself in the form of a
sphinx.]

The obelisk which was erected in honor of the sun could therefore also be
used by the sun's offspring, the king, to promulgate his own worship.
Inscriptions commemorating both the deity in heaven and his deputy on earth
continually blend the two, the god and the king, together into one person,
that we can easily find in the obelisk traces of a decided king-worship. If
the enlightened age of an Alexander the Great or a Divus ("divine") Cæsar
Augustus could tolerate such a thing, why should we feign surprise when we
find the same thing to have happened some thousand years before their time
in Egypt? It is just this one fact, the barefaced king-worship represented
by the obelisk, that gives its translation such a repulsive sound to modern
ears. No wonder that otherwise well-read and intelligent men turn about in
amazement and ask: Can this really be the correct translation of the
obelisk, why, this would turn those ancient kings of glorious renown into
mere "vainglorious fools"? This conclusion is perfectly true, and
consequently it is to be regretted that just such monuments as obelisks,
which are a great source of attraction for the multitude, should display
the poorest inscriptions that we meet with in the entire Egyptian
literature. Under no circumstances must we base our estimate of the
Egyptian literature on the inscriptions of the obelisks; for, on looking
over the writings of this wonderful people, we would not only find
ourselves most agreeably surprised, but would be constrained to admit that
there is no ancient people which can boast of an equally grand and sublime
literature as the Egyptian.

{33}[Illustration: A portion of the "Book of the Dead" (Chap. I.). Two
obelisks represented on a mummy-cloth. From the author's collection.]

{34}Summing up, we find the obelisks erected in honor of the sun-god by his
son, the king, and used by him to further his own ambitious designs,
glorify his own name, and turn the worship of his subjects both to himself
and his sire above.

NOTE. Besides the frequent mention of the obelisk in the countless Egyptian
inscriptions on stone, wood, leather, and papyrus, dating back to the
earliest dynasties, we find the picture of two obelisks in many copies of
the sacred writings of the Egyptians, the so-called "Book of the Dead" or
the Egyptian Ritual. It forms part of the vignette of the first division of
this book (1-15 chap.), which has mostly to do with hymns, prayers, and
incantations addressed to the sun-god. No mention is made of the obelisk in
the text of the Ritual. On the preceding page will be found the picture of
the two obelisks on a piece of mummy-cloth in the possession of the author.
The Hieratic words below the vignette form a portion of the first chapter
of the Ritual.




{35}[Illustration]




CHAPTER V

THE HISTORY OF THE NEW YORK OBELISK, AND ITS REMOVAL FROM ALEXANDRIA.


[Illustration: King Thothmes III.]

§1. The obelisk in Central Park antedates our Christian era by more than
fifteen centuries. The central columns of the four sides, being the first
that were inscribed, record as the author of this monument, Thothmes III.,
called the Great, the greatest sovereign of that period (about 1600 B. C.).
A warrior of wonderful prowess and a ruler of the highest intelligence, he
put aside at an early date the leading-strings of his famous sister and
co-regent, Hatasu, surnamed Makarâ, and constituted himself sole regent and
law-giver. He heads the list of the kings of the XVIIIth dynasty. From the
beginning to the end of his reign the inscriptions record his victories
over foreign nations. He claims it as his order from the god Amen to extend
the boundaries of Egypt. He subdues the prince of Kadesh in Upper
{36}Palestine at Megiddo, and overpowers the Kharu [Syrian] and Kheta
[Hittite] tribes. The Rotennu [Syrians of Mesopotamia] are conquered,
Damascus falls, and Carkhemish is taken. He reaches Nineveh, the Tigris,
and the Orontes, and is everywhere victorious. He claims as his own and in
vassalage all of the then known world. It is he whom Pliny calls Mesphres,
and of whom he says that he erected a pair of obelisks, commemorating his
valiant deeds. These obelisks are at present in London and New York.

[Illustration: Cartouche of Thothmes III. "The king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Men-Kheper-Ra, the son of Ra, Thoth-Meses".]

The exact time of the erection of these two obelisks cannot be determined,
as they bear no date, but it must have been in the earlier part of the
reign of Thothmes III., which extended from 1591 to 1565 B. C. (according
to Lepsius). He ordered them at the quarry in Syene and erected them in
front of the temple of the sun in Heliopolis or the Egyptian [glyphs], AN.
The site of this once prosperous city is now at the village of Matarîyeh
near Cairo, which has no antiquities to boast of, except one erect obelisk
of Usertesen I., the only vestige of the famous "City of the Sun". Here the
obelisks stood for many centuries amid wonderful surroundings, guarding as
it were the entrance to the sanctuary of the deity, to whom they were
sacred.

[Illustration: Cartouche of Ramses II. "The king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
User-Ma-Ra-Sotep-en-Ra, the son of Ra, Amen-Mer-Ra-Meses-Su."]

[Illustration: King Ramses II.]

They were not allowed to remain intact for a very long time, for a century
is an insignificant matter when we deal with Egyptian history. Almost three
centuries had passed, when a new conqueror arose, who was emulous of his
great predecessor's deeds, and who envied him his renown. This was Ramses
II., surnamed "the Great", {37}the "Pharaoh of the Oppression", who reigned
from 1388 to 1322 B. C. (according to Lepsius). Not only in his monuments
but also in his deeds he carries off equal honors with Thothmes the Great.
We find the wars of former days fought over again, and always successfully,
and we see his exploits recorded not only on impassive monuments of stone
but also in the writings on fragile papyrus. A second Iliad by the poet
Pentaûr recalls some wonderful hymns addressed amid the din of battle to
his guardian deities, in particular to Amen-Râ, and gives us such a vivid
picture of war as to surpass in many respects even old Homer. Ramses' most
stubborn opponents were the Kheta (Hittites) with whom he negotiated a most
favorable treaty after many years of war. But with all his good qualities
he had one great fault, vainglory. Not satisfied with erecting obelisks,
stelé, and temples with his name inscribed on them in large letters, and
seeing {38}his works recorded over all the known world, he even
appropriated the monuments of his predecessors and, though not guilty of
erasing their names and substituting his own instead, as Thothmes III. had
done on his sister's obelisk and monuments, yet he crowded his name and the
story of his deeds within all the available space left uninscribed on these
monuments. He had the two outside columns on each side of our obelisk
inscribed, leaving to Thothmes III. besides the pyramidion only about one
third of the obelisk's surface. This, of course, gave him an advantage over
his predecessors, and he thereby saved the large expense and the time that
would have been required for quarrying and erecting monuments of his own.
He died at an advanced age after having ruled over Egypt for 67 years. His
mummy, discovered in 1881, now rests in the Museum of Bulak at Cairo.

[Illustration: Cartouche of Osarkon I. "The king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
Kherp-Kheper-Ra-Sotep-en-Ra, the son of Ra, Amen-Mer-Usarken."]

[Illustration: Cartouche of the emperor Augustus Cæsar. "The divine lord of
the world, Autokrator, the son of Ra, lord of the diadems,
Cæsar-Ankh-Zeta-Ptah-Ast-Mer."]

The four sides of the obelisk were now filled, and it would appear
impossible for another king to have used any other part of it for his own
purpose. Such is, however, not the case. Osarkon I. had chiseled into the
stone at the very edges of each side in diminutive characters his own name.
He was a Pharaoh of the xxiid dynasty, who lived about 960 B. C., and
represents the decline of the ancient Egyptian empire.

[Illustration: Cleopatra VI. (From an ancient coin.)]

[Illustration: Cartouche of queen Cleopatra VI. "The queen and mistress of
the world, Cleopatra."]

Of the history of our obelisk since that time very little would be known
except for the inscriptions found on the brass crabs at the base. From them
we learn that the obelisk was taken away from its position in front of the
temple of Heliopolis in the XVIIIth year of the reign of {39}Augustus Cæsar
(12 B. C.) by Pontius during the prefecture of Barbarus. It was then
transported to Alexandria and placed in front of the Cæsareum, the temple
of the Cæsars, with the obelisk at present in London. During the
transportation a large portion of the edges at the base was very badly
damaged. Four large bronze crabs were then placed under the obelisk to keep
it from falling over. Since this time of their erection in Alexandria
tradition has associated one of them, the New York Obelisk, with the name
of the monster-queen Cleopatra VI. She had, however, nothing {40}whatever
to do with the removal of the obelisks as she and all her predecessors of
the same name had been dead long before these were erected in Alexandria.
Here both remained for many centuries until one--the present London
Obelisk--fell prostrate and was left to lie half-hidden in the ground. It
was subsequently taken in 1877 to England, while the other obelisk remained
standing in Alexandria until 1880, when it was lowered into the steamer
Dessoug, brought over to our country, and presented to New York City
through the munificence of the late Mr. William H. Vanderbilt.

[Illustration: Cleopatra VI. (From Egyptian monuments.)]

§2.[1] At the time of the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 the Khedive
Ishmaël first suggested the removal of {41}the standing obelisk at
Alexandria to the United States. This suggestion was soon spread abroad and
it was estimated that for $60,000 the obelisk could be removed. As the late
Mr. William H. Vanderbilt had agreed to furnish this sum, negotiations were
opened with the Egyptian government in 1877 for the definite gift of the
obelisk. These proved successful. Bids were then requested for its removal
and the bid of the late Commander Henry H. Gorringe, U. S. N., was
accepted. Mr. Gorringe went to work immediately but clearly saw that he
would not be able to proceed in the same manner as others had done before
him in the removal of the Luxor Obelisk to Paris or the Alexandrian to
London. These were taken in tow and in this manner reached their
destination. This plan could not be adopted for bringing the obelisk across
the ocean. When the work of transporting the obelisk to the harbor of
Alexandria was accomplished, the steamer Dessoug was purchased from the
Egyptian government and in it the obelisk was carried to New York.

{42}[Illustration: "Cleopatra's Needle" as it stood in Alexandria before
its removal to New York in 1880.]

{43}As soon as the news of the presentation by the Egyptian government of
Cleopatra's Needle to the United States reached the ears of the foreign
residents of Alexandria, a most disgraceful agitation was begun against
Commander Gorringe. Everything was tried and done to embarrass him in his
work, and all sorts of obstacles were put in his way. But the man at the
head of the undertaking could not be intimidated. On October 27, 1879 work
was begun by the removal of the earth that had accumulated around the base
of the obelisk. The latter was next incased to protect its many
inscriptions, and on December 6th of the same year everything was ready for
turning the great monolith. This was successfully effected. Another
difficulty now presented itself, how to get the obelisk to the harbor, this
being on the other side of the city. The foreign residents had forbidden
the use of the paved streets, by which route the obelisk would have been
easily transported, and Commander Gorringe was now obliged to undertake the
difficult task of bringing the obelisk around the whole city over the
shallow water and the sandbanks. This he accomplished by means of a
caisson. However, an unobstructed channel through the water to the dry-dock
was first necessary. Divers were hired until March 1880 and employed in
removing about 170 tons of granite, being the débris of former Alexandrian
monumental structures. While the obelisk was being lowered the spite of the
European residents was again painfully felt. Nevertheless, although with
vastly increased expenses, Commander Gorringe here succeeded in his work.
By this enforced method of transportation he incurred an extra expense of
$21,000. When the Egyptian steamer Dessoug had been purchased and, after
many delays, brought into the dry-dock, an aperture was made in its side,
large enough to admit of the incased obelisk being pushed into the hold of
the vessel. The side was then closed, the steamer was ready for its voyage,
and the tedious work of the brave and indefatigable Commander was at an end
as far as Egypt was concerned. On June 1, 1880 the vessel steamed out of
the harbor with the Stars and Stripes floating in the breeze, carrying the
obelisk, the pedestal, and the stones for the foundation.

On July 19, 1880 the Dessoug arrived in New York. The site where the
obelisk was to stand, namely Graywacke Knoll opposite the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in Central Park, had already been selected. The foundation
was completed on October 10. The large square pedestal was carted from the
North River and 51st St. to the Park, and then pushed on greased planks to
the place of erection. The disembarking of the obelisk, however, presented
many difficulties, the most humiliating {44}being the greed of certain rich
men, who refused to place their dry-docks at the disposal of the Commander
for a high price which he offered, and compelled him to try Lawler's Marine
Railway on Staten Island. His experiment with this was quite successfully
carried out on August 21, 1880. On September 14th the obelisk was once more
afloat on pontoons. On September 16th the steamer Manhattan towed the
pontoons with the obelisk to the North River and 96th St. Then the
land-journey began. The obelisk passed as far as the West Boulevard, down
to 86th St., then through the Transverse Road No. 3 in Central Park, issued
from the Park at Fifth Avenue and 85th St., and was then taken down to 82d
St. Here a trestle-work was built up to Graywacke Knoll, the final
resting-place of the obelisk. On December 22, 1880 the point of the obelisk
was turned up this trestle-work, and on January 22, 1881 everything was
ready for placing it in position on the pedestal. The crabs had been recast
in the Brooklyn Navy Yard and perfectly fitted to the uneven base of the
obelisk. The latter easily swung and revolved on the turning-structure, and
at noon of the same day it stood in the identical position as at
Alexandria. On February 22, 1881 the obelisk was formally presented in
behalf of the Khedive of Egypt, through the liberality of Mr. William H.
Vanderbilt, to the city of New York.

The total cost of the removal of the obelisk was: for material and labor
$86,603 and for incidental expenses $15,973, a sum total of $102,576. Mr.
W. H. Vanderbilt paid the whole amount out of his own purse. The Congress
of the United States took due notice of the wonderful feat of procuring for
our country such a grand specimen of Egyptian monuments, and fitting
resolutions were passed by both the Senate and the House of
Representatives. And certainly a sincere vote of thanks {45}will be given
for his munificent gift to our late illustrious fellow citizen, William H.
Vanderbilt, by everyone having at heart the honor and advancement of our
city and country.

[Illustration: Ruins of Tanis.]


{46}CHAPTER VI

THE INSCRIPTIONS OF THE NEW YORK OBELISK.


_I. Inscriptions of Thothmes III._

The inscriptions of Thothmes III. comprise the four sides of the pyramidion
and the central columns of the four faces of the obelisk.


THE PYRAMIDION.

The pictures of the four sides of the pyramidion here given are reproduced
from the squeezes taken under the direction of Mr. Gorringe as published in
his "Egyptian Obelisks". They are, however, given in their correct form, as
the squeezes seem to have been taken by an inexperienced hand and a person
unacquainted with Egyptological subjects. The figures seated in the squares
are the gods Râ-Hor-Khuti and Tum, representing the rising and the setting
sun. The former is the hawk-faced god seated on a throne, holding in his
right hand the staff of power [glyphs] (US "_power_"), and handing it to
the king with the usual sign [glyphs] (ÂNKH "_life_"). Besides this the
disk of the sun [glyphs] (RÂ "_sun_") reclines on his head. The god Tum, on
the other hand, is represented in his human form, bearded and wearing a
king's head-dress [glyphs], and holding in his hands the identical symbols
of [glyphs] "_life_" and [glyphs] "_power_". In front of the gods we find
in each case the king represented as an androsphinx ([glyphs]) in the act
of offering libation to the divinity. It must be noted that this kind of
sphinx being human-faced and bearded, is always the representation of
Pharaoh as the essence of the godhead.


{47}East Face of the Pyramidion.

[Illustration]

The three vertical columns to the left above and the two below the sphinx
refer to the sphinx-king, the remainder to the god RÂ-HOR-KHUTI (_i. e._
"the sun, Horus in the horizon") and the libation in the hands of the
sphinx.

The three columns above the sphinx are:

   nuter    nefer     neb           taui        Men-kheper-Râ
  The god · good · lord (of · the) two countries · Thothmes III. ·

    du     ânkh    zeta
  giving · life · forever.

_i. e._ This is _Thothmes III., the gracious god, the lord of the two
countries [Egypt], who gives eternal life_.

Below the sphinx we read:

     qa       nekht      khâ       em     Us                           {48}
  The bull · powerful · glorious · in · Thebes ·

    sa       Râ   Men-kheper-Râ
  son (of) · Râ · Thothmes III.

_i. e._ This is _the powerful_ and _glorious bull_ [king] _in Thebes, the
Sun's offspring, Thothmes III._

The term [glyphs] NEB TAUI "lord of the two countries" is the usual title
of Pharaoh. The two countries referred to are Upper and Lower Egypt, which
are still and have been from time immemorial the two provinces of Egypt.
The word seems, however, to imply still more. In the pompous wording of the
Pharaonic monuments it expresses the grand title of the Roman emperors:
lord of the Universe.--The [glyphs] DU ÂNKH ZETA "who gives eternal life"
calls attention to the king's power over the life and death of all his
subjects. As he himself received life from the gods, so he bestowed it on
his people at pleasure.--[glyphs] QA NEKHT "the powerful bull" is a truly
Oriental expression for "the mighty hero", the bull being a symbol of
strength and power. The same king is addressed by the deity in his
victory-stelé, already alluded to on page 31, in the following words:
[glyphs] DU·A MA SEN HEN·K EM QA RENP MEN AB SPUT ÂBUI NEN HAN·TU·F "_I let
them behold your majesty like a young and stout-hearted bull whetting his
horns; none can escape him._"--[glyphs] US "Thebes" was the capital of
Upper Egypt and the seat of government at that time.--[glyphs] SA RÂ "the
son of Râ" is the usual title of Pharaoh which has already been explained
on page 31.

The four columns to the right above the god bear the following legend:

    du     ânkh·   f    neb   Râ-Hor-khuti                             {49}
  giving · life · him · all · Râ-Hor-Khuti ·

  nuter       â       neb taui (neb ta neb ta)
  the god · great · lord (of the) two countries.


_i. e._ This is _Ra-Hor-Khuti, the great god, the lord of the two
countries_ [Egypt], _who gives him_ [the king] _all life_.

Between the god and the sphinx-king we read these words referring to the
libation brought by the king:

  er     du·t    arp
  for · a gift · wine.

_i. e._ _As a gift_ (the king brings an offering of) _wine._

[glyphs] RÂ-HOR-KHUTI "_the sun, the hawk of the horizon_" is the name of
the sun-god when in his full power at noon (see page 30).--The names of all
kings are always written in oval rings called _cartouches_, to distinguish
them more readily from other words and names in the inscriptions. The usual
"divine" title of Thothmes III. is [glyphs] MEN-KHEPER-RÂ (the first sign
being read last), which means "_the stable_ and _creative sun_". His family
name, in its simplest form, is [glyphs] DEHUTI-MESES "_child of Thoth_".
There are as many as 12 variants (or different readings) of this cartouche,
prominent and somewhat odd among them being the following:

  Dehuti-meses-nefer-kheperu    Dehuti-meses-heq-Us       Dehuti-mes
  Thoth's child, of beautiful   Thoth's child, lord of   Thoth's child.
           form.                       Thebes.

The most singular cartouche of Thothmes III., however, is found on our New
York Obelisk on the East Face and central column (see page 56).


{50}South Pace of the Pyramidion.

[Illustration]

The three columns above to the left refer to the sphinx-king and are
identical with those of the East pyramidion (page 47): [glyphs] NUTER NEFER
NEB TAUI MEN-KHEPER-RÂ DU ÂNKH ZETA "This is _Thothmes III., the gracious
god, the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _who gives eternal life_".

The hieroglyphs below the sphinx-king are totally destroyed, but must have
been the same as those on the East pyramidion (page 48): [glyphs] QA NEKHT
KHÂ EM US SA RÂ MEN-KHEPER-RÂ "This is _the powerful and glorious bull_
[king] _in Thebes, the Sun's offspring, Thothmes III_".

{51}The four columns above to the right refer to the god Tum, the setting
sun, seated on a throne beneath. The inscription is:

     du    ânkh·   f    neb   Tum      neb            taui
  Giving · life · him · all · Tum · lord (of · the) two countries ·

   heq              An       nuter      â       neb            ha·t
  prince (of) · Heliopolis · the god · great · lord (of · the) temple.

_i. e._ This is _Tum, the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _the prince
of Heliopolis, the great god, the lord of_ his _temple, who gives him_ [the
king] _all life_.

[glyphs] HEQ AN "_the prince of Heliopolis_" signifies as much as "the
tutelary divinity of Heliopolis". This famous city was the capital of the
XIIIth _nome_ or province of Lower (Northern) Egypt bearing the same name.
The name it received from the Greeks and Romans means "City of the
Sun".--[glyphs] TUM "_Tum_" was the god of the setting sun. The word is
derived from the Egyptian verb [glyphs] TUM "_to close, finish_", and when
referring to the sun "_to set_" (cf. page 27). A fuller form of the name is
Atum.--[glyphs] ÂNKH NEB literally "_all life_" is a very concise
expression for "_all manner of life_" and embraces every visible act of
life, such as breath, animation, motion, thought, speech, pleasure, &c. The
hieroglyph [glyphs], always pronounced NEB, has, as can be seen from this
sentence, two different meanings, "_all_" and "_lord_", which result from
the primitive idea of "possession".

The inscription between the god and the sphinx-king is destroyed with the
exception of the letter [glyphs] [R] at the top. It must have been,
however, the same as on the East pyramidion, namely: [glyphs] ER DU·T ARP
"_As a gift_ (the king brings an offering of) _wine_".


{52}West Face of the Pyramidion.

[Illustration]

The four columns above to the right (the last one being destroyed) refer to
the sphinx-king and read as follows:

   nuter     nefer        heq         An              suten kaut?
  The god · gracious · prince of · Heliopolis · king of Upper and Lower

             neb           taui           Men-kheper-Râ    du      ânkh
  Egypt · lord (of · the) two countries · Thothmes III. · giving · life ·

    zeta
  forever.

_i. e._ This is _the gracious god, the prince of Heliopolis, the king of
Upper and Lower Egypt, the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Thothmes
III., who gives eternal life_.

{53}[glyphs] SUTEN-KAUT (pronunciation doubtful!) "the king of Upper and
Lower Egypt" is the official title of the Egyptian kings and conveys the
same meaning as the [glyphs] NEB TAUI "_the lord of the two countries_"
mentioned so frequently above. Another name of the king, and one that has
been embodied into our language, is [glyphs] PER Â "_Pharaoh_", which is,
literally translated, "_the great house_"; a title bearing the closest
resemblance to the modern "Sublime Porte" of the Turkish sultan.

Below the sphinx is the same inscription as on the East pyramidion:
[glyphs] QA NEKHT KHÂ EM US SA RÂ MEN-KHEPER-RÂ "This is _the powerful_ and
_glorious bull_ [king] _in Thebes, the Sun's offspring, Thothmes III_".

The three columns above to the left refer to the god Tum, who is seated
below, and read:

     du   ânkh       ded        us       Tum   neb        An
  Giving · life · stability · strength · Tum · lord of · Heliopolis ·

  nuter     nefer        â     neb    en    ha · t
  the god · gracious · great · lord · of · the temple.

_i. e._ This is _Tum, the lord of Heliopolis, the gracious_ and _great god,
the lord of_ his _temple, who gives life, stability_, and _strength_.

The inscription between the god and the sphinx-king differs from that of
the preceding pyramidions; it is:

  er     du·t    qebeh      ar        ef     du     ânkh
  For · a gift · libation · to make · him ·  give · life.

_i. e._ The king _pours out a libation_ of water _in order to receive from
him_ [the god] _life_.


{54}North Face of the Pyramidion.

[Illustration]

The four columns above to the left refer to the sphinx-king and read:

   nuter     nefer      neb     ar       khet     suten kaut?
  The god · gracious · lord · maker of · things · king of Upper and Lower

            neb             taui         Men-kheper-Râ   du       ânkh
  Egypt · lord (of ·the) two countries · Thothmes III. · giving · life ·

  zeta
  forever.

_i. e._ This is _the gracious god, the lord_ and _maker of everything, the
king of Upper and Lower Egypt, the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt],
_Thothmes III., who gives eternal life_.

{55}The inscription below the sphinx is identical with the one on the East
pyramidion; namely, [glyphs] [glyphs] QA NEKHT KHÂ EM US SA RÂ
MEN-KHEPER-RÂ "This is _the powerful_ and _glorious bull_ [king] _in
Thebes, the Sun's offspring, Thothmes III_".

The three columns above to the right refer to the sun-god Râ seated below,
and read:

    du     ânkh   ef    neb    Râ-Hor-    khuti           neb
  Giving · life · him · all · Râ-Horus in the horizon · lord (of ·

        taui
  the) two countries.

_i. e._ This is _Ra-Hor-khuti, the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _who
gives him_ [the king] _all life_.

[glyphs] RÂ-HOR-KHUTI "Râ-Horus in the horizon" is the title of the
morning-sun, to which attention has already been called on page 30. The
last sign is very frequently written [glyphs] KHU·T, the [glyphs] showing
the disk of the sun between two mountains and in the act of rising, and the
[glyphs] signifying "a house" or "a place". The whole group means "the
house of the rising sun" or "the source of light", which is usually
translated by the general term "horizon". The whole title, therefore,
stands for the rising or eastern sun (cf. the picture on page 28).

The inscription between the god and the sphinx-king is partially destroyed,
leaving, however, enough traces to show that it must have been identical
with the one on the West pyramidion: [glyphs] ER DU·T QEBEH AR·F DU ÂNKH
"The king _pours out a libation_ of water _in order to receive from him_
[the god] _life_".


{56}THE OBELISK PROPER.

On the obelisk proper the inscriptions of Thothmes III. are contained in
the central column of each face. At the top of each column, immediately
below the pyramidion, we find the sign [glyphs], literally PET "heaven",
which may either be taken with the next sign [glyphs] HOR "Horus" so as to
signify "the heavenly Horus", or else it may be regarded to express the
wish of the Pharaoh, that heaven would protect his obelisk and proclaim its
inscriptions as of heavenly origin.


EAST FACE [CENTRAL COLUMN].

     Hor-pet            qa    nekht      khâ        em     Us
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · glorious · in · Thebes ·

  neb mut _or_ sheta neb ârâ _or_ mehen · t
  lord of the Vulture diadem ·      lord of the Uræus-snake diadem ·

   ûah    suten    ma    Râ   em     pet    Tum   neb · t en   An
  placed · king · like · Râ · in · heaven · Tum · lord ·  of · Heliopolis ·

    meses    sa    en  kha · t  ef   meses  nef   Dehuti   qema     en
  begotten · son · of · womb · his · born · him · Thoth · created · by ·

  sen    em      hat-â       em    neferu      hâu    sen     rekh
  them · in · great-temple · in · beauty of · limbs · their · knowing ·

  enti     ar · f     sutenî · t   ûah     kher   neheh       suten-kaut?
  what · he should do · kingdom · placed · for · eternity · king of Upper
                                                            and Lower Egypt

  Men-kheper-Râ   Tum  nuter    â     henâ   pau · t   nuteru ·    f
  Thothmes III. · Tum · god · great · with · circle · (of) gods · his ·

    merî      du     ânkh     ded         us       neb    ma    Râ   {57}
  beloved · giving · life · stability · strength · all · like · Râ ·

  zeta
  forever.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful_ and
_glorious bull_ [king] _in Thebes_.[2] He is _the lord of the Vulture_ and
_Uræus diadems_[3], and his _kingdom is established_ as firmly _as the sun
in the heavens_. His name is[4]: "_He whom Tum, the lord of Heliopolis, has
begotten_, and who is _the son of his loins, whom Thoth has brought
forth_"[5], who _was created by them_ [the gods] _in the great temple_ of
Heliopolis _in the beauty of their limbs,_ and _who knew_ beforehand _what
he would do to establish_ for himself _an eternal kingdom_. He is _Thothmes
III., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, beloved of the great god Tum and
his circle of gods, who gives all life, stability, and strength now and for
ever!_


{58}SOUTH FACE [CENTRAL COLUMN].

Almost the entire column on this side is in a very poor condition, the
hieroglyphs being hardly discernible. The following, however, may prove to
be a correct restoration of the inscription.

     Hor-pet           qa      nekht     Râ    mer            suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ · beloved · king of Upper and

                 Men-kheper-Râ   ar      nef     em     mennu · f
  Lower Egypt ·  Thothmes III. · made · by him · for · monument · his ·

  en     tef      neb       An             s · âhâ        nef
  for · father · lord of · Heliopolis · caused to erect · by him ·

  tekhenui       ûrui     benben · t      em     usem       em   sep
  two obelisks · large · the pyramidion · of · gold-metal · at · time ·

     tep           sed-heb              ..........                  nen
  first (of) · the thirty-year-period · ... _illegible!_ ... · not ·

   ar nef            sa Râ      Dehuti-meses-nefer-kheperu
  (as) done by him · the son of Râ ·  Thothmes III. ·

  Râ-Hor-khuti  merî    zeta
  Râ-Hor-Khuti · beloved · forever.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull,
beloved of Ra_. He is _Thothmes III., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
who has made_ this to be _his monument_ in honor _of_ his _father_ Tum,
_the lord of Heliopolis_, and who _has set up for him two[6] large
obelisks, the pyramidion_ being covered _with gold-metal,[7] on the first
day[8] of the thirty-year festival[9] ..........[10] No one_ has ever done
what _he did, the Sun's offspring_, {59}_Thothmes III., the beloved of
Ra-Hor-Khuti_, who lives _forever_.



WEST FACE [CENTRAL COLUMN].

The abrasion caused by the sand of the Libyan desert has effaced almost
every hieroglyph on this side of the obelisk. All that can be seen is given
below.

      Hor-pet          qa     nekht       khâ       em     Us
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · glorious · in · Thebes ·

          suten-kaut?             Men-kheper-Râ       s · menkh
  king of Upper and Lower Egypt · Thothmes III. · causing to be adorned ·

    per       en   meses      am · f                ..........
  the house · of · birth · there · his ·   ...._illegible!_.... ·

     sa      Râ   Dehuti-meses-nefer-kheperu  Râ-Hor-khuti           {60}
  the son of Râ ·       Thothmes III. ·       Râ-Hor-Khuti ·

  merî      zeta
  beloved · forever.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful_ and
_glorious bull_ [king] _in Thebes_. He is _the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Thothmes III., who has embellished the house where he was born,
.........., the Sun's offspring, Thothmes III., the beloved of
Ra-Hor-Khuti_, who lives _forever_.


NORTH FACE [CENTRAL COLUMN].

      Hor-pet              hez             qa      Râ     mer
  The heavenly Horus · the white crown · lifting · Râ · beloved · king of

   suten-kaut?            Men-kheper-Râ      Hor-nub            har
  Upper and Lower Egypt · Thothmes III. · the golden Horus · rejoicing in ·

  nekht        hu          hequ            men · tu?       pehu     su
  strength · smiting · the princes (of) · the countries · distant · they ·

   khatf     utu        nef      tef     Râ    nekhtu     er      ta
  because · ordered · for him · father · Râ · victories · over · land ·

  neb       dem·t      ent  khepesh  em      ru          dedui ·
  all · completeness · of ·  power · at · the end of · the two hands ·

   f        er            s·usekh              tash·tu           Qem · t
  his · in order to · cause to be extended · the boundaries of · Egypt ·

     sa        Râ   Dehuti-meses-nefer-kheperu du     ânkh   neb     zeta
  the son of · Râ · Thothmes III. ·          giving · life · all · forever.

{61}_i.e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, who has crowned_[11]
himself _with the white crown_[12], _beloved of Ra_. He is _Thothmes III.,
the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, the golden Horus_[13], _rejoicing in_
his _strength, the vanquisher of the princes of the countries which are
distant_. He did this _because_ his _father Ra had_ so _commanded him_, and
had then given him _victories over the entire world_, and had placed _an
abundance of power on his arm, so that he_ [the king] _might enlarge the
boundaries of Egypt_. This was done by _the Sun's offspring, Thothmes III.,
who gives all life forever_.


{62}_II. Inscriptions of Ramses II._

The inscriptions of Ramses II. are found in the two vertical columns to the
right and left of the central column of each face and the two horizontal
lines at the base of each face of the obelisk. The inscriptions are in a
much better condition than those of Thothmes III., and can be more readily
deciphered. They were engraved on the stone not quite three centuries after
the pyramidions and the central columns were inscribed. Even a casual
observer will notice that the hawk at the top of each central column is
larger than those to the right and left of it, these being crowded into the
remaining space.


EAST FACE [NORTHERN COLUMN].

     Hor-pet           qa      nekht     Râ     mer          suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ · beloved · king of Upper and

      User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   Râ       meses     nuteru        ger
  Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · the Sun · born of · the gods · possessing ·

     taui              sa     Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  hun     shepes
  the two worlds · the son of Râ ·       Ramses II. ·  a child · glorious ·

  merîti    ma     Aten   pesed·   f    em      khu·t      neb
  beloved · like · Aten · shines · he · in · the horizon · lord · of the

  taui      User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   sa      Râ
  two countries · Ramses II. ·      son of   Râ ·

  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  khu       en   Râ     du     ânkh            {63}
         Ramses II. · the glory · of · Râ · giving · life.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull,
beloved of Ra_. He is _Ramses II._[14], _the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
the Sun_ himself, and _the child of the gods_. He is _master of the two
countries_ [Egypt], _the Sun's offspring, Ramses II._[15] He is _a youth
glorious_ and _beloved like Aten_[16], _when he shines in the horizon_. He
is _the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II._[14], _the Sun's
offspring, Ramses II._[15], _the glorious_ image _of Ra, who gives life_.

{64}EAST FACE [SOUTHERN COLUMN].

      Hor-pet         qa     nekht       khepera      sa    suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus· bull · powerful ·  Khepera's ·  son · king of Upper

            User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   Hor-nub           user       renpe·tu
  and Lower Egypt · Ramses II. ·  the golden Horus · abounding in · years ·

  â       en    nekhtu       sa Râ      Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   per     en
  great · in · victories · the son of Râ · Ramses II.    · going out · by ·

  ef     em     kha·t  er   shep     khâu      en   Râ     meses
  him · from ·  womb · to · obtain · diadems · of · Râ · begetting ·

    su      er    neb    uâ       neb          taui
  himself · as ·  lord · only · lord of · the two countries ·

  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   sa Râ      Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su khu      en
  Ramses II.    ·         son of Râ · Ramses II.        the glory · of ·

  Râ     ma Râ
  Râ ·   to-day (_literally_: like Râ).

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull, the
son of Khepera_[17]. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
the golden Horus, who abounds in years_ and _is great in victories_. He is
_the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., who issued from the_ Sun's _loins to
receive the diadems of Ra_. It is he _who brought forth himself[18] as sole
ruler_ and _lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II., the Sun's
offspring, Ramses II., the glorious_ image _of Ra, now_ and forever.


{65}SOUTH FACE [EASTERN COLUMN].

      Hor-pet          qa      nekht      Mâ      mer       suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Truth · beloved · king of Upper
                                                          and Lower Egypt ·

  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ  neb      heb       ma      tef ·   f
        Ramses II. ·    lord of · festival · like · father · his ·

  Ptah-tathunen     sa         Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su nuter  nuteri
  Ptah-tatunen · the son of    Râ ·      Ramses II. ·     god · morning

     dûa         taui            rekh       hapu       shef · t      em
  star of · the two countries · knowing · the laws · awe inspiring · in ·

   arî · tu       neb             taui  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ  sa    Râ
  (his) works · the lord of · the two countries · Ramses II. · son of Râ ·

  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   du     ânkh
       Ramses II. ·    giving · life.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull,
beloved of Ma_.[19] He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
the lord of festivals_, who is _like his father Ptah of Memphis_.[20] He is
_the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., a god_ himself, _the morning-star of the
two countries_, who is well _versed in the laws_ and _awe inspiring in_ his
_works_. He is _the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II., the
Sun's offspring Ramses II., who gives life_.


{66}SOUTH FACE [WESTERN COLUMN].

     Hor-pet         qa    nekht   Râ      sa          suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ's · son · king of Upper and

     User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   neb mut _or_ sheta     neb ârâ _or_ mehen · t
   Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · lord of the Vulture   lord of the Uræus-snake
                                  diadem ·                  diadem ·

       mâk       Qem · t     uâf         men · tu?       sa      Râ
  protector of · Egypt · smiter of · the countries · the son of  Râ ·

  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su suten  menkh   ma    Râ   ..........        neb taui
  Ramses II. ·         king · kind · like · Râ · _illegible!_ · lord of the
                                                            two countries ·
  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ    sa Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   ma Râ
      Ramses II. ·       the son of Râ · Ramses II. ·      to-day
                                                   (_literally_: like Râ).


_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull, the
son of Ra_. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, the lord
of the Vulture_ and _Uræus diadems, who protects Egypt_ and _smites the_
foreign _nations_. He is _the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., a kind ruler
like Ra, .......... the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II.,
the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., now_ and forever.


{67}WEST FACE [NORTHERN COLUMN].

      Hor-pet          qa     nekht      Râ    mer          suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ · beloved · king of Upper and

     User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ    Râ      meses      nuteru     ger
  Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · the Sun · born of · the gods · possessing ·

      taui               sa Râ     Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  ..........
  the two countries · the son of Râ ·     Ramses II.   · _illegible!_

   nen       ar          ar·       f    em       per        tef·      f
   not · (was) done · (what) did · he · in · the house of · father · his ·

   neb         taui           User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   sa Râ
  lord of · the two countries ·    Ramses II. ·      son of Râ ·

  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   du     ânkh
      Ramses II. ·     giving · life.

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull,
beloved of Ra_. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt_, who
is _the Sun_ himself and _child of the gods_. He is _master of the two
countries_ [Egypt], _the Sun's offspring, Ramses II. .......... No one has
done_ what _he did in his father's_ [Tum's] _house_. He is _the lord of the
two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II., the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., who
gives life_.


{68}WEST FACE [SOUTHERN COLUMN].

       Hor-pet         qa     nekht      Râ     sa       suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ's · son · king of Upper and

      User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ    Hor-nub           user        renpe·tu
  Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · the golden Horus · abounding in · years ·

  â       en    nekhtu     sa Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses  ..........
  great · in · victories ·son of Râ · Ramses II. ·    _illegible!_

   neb taui    User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-R   sa Râ  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   ma Râ
  lord of the two     Ramses II.   · son of Râ ·   Ramses II. ·     to-day.
  countries ·

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull, the
son of Ra_. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, the
golden Horus, who abounds in years_ and _is great in victories_. He is _the
Sun's offspring, Ramses II._,  .......... He is _the lord of the two
countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II., the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., now_ and
forever.


NORTH FACE [EASTERN COLUMN].

     Hor-pet         qa    nekht   Mâ     mer              suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Mâ · beloved ·  king of Upper and

    User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ    neb       hebu        ma    tef·     f {69}
  Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · lord of · festivals · like · father · his ·

  Ptah   sa Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  meses    en   Râ       er
  Ptah · son of Râ · Ramses II.  ·   begotten · by · Râ · in order to ·

       s·heb            An            er            s·zef
  cause to be glad · Heliopolis ·in order to · cause to be filled ·

        peru         meses        su        neb       taui
  the sanctuaries · begetting · himself · lord of · the two countries ·

  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ  sa Râ     Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su   du
      Ramses II. ·     the son of Râ ·   Ramses II. ·     giving ·

  ânkh   neb    ma Râ
  life · all · to-day (_literally_: like Râ).

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull,
beloved of Ma_ [Truth]. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, the lord of the festivals like his father Ptah_. He is _the Sun's
offspring, Ramses II._, whom _Ra has begotten in order to gladden
Heliopolis_ and _fill_ her _sanctuaries_ with treasures. It is he _who
brought forth himself_ as _lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II.,
the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., who gives all life now_ and forever.


{70}NORTH FACE [WESTERN COLUMN].

      Hor-pet        qa     nekht  Râ     sa            suten-kaut?
  The heavenly Horus · bull · powerful · Râ's · son · king of Upper and

    User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ    neb mut _or_ sheta      neb ârâ _or_ mehen·t
  Lower Egypt · Ramses II. · lord of the Vulture   lord of the Uræus-snake
                                    diadem ·                 diadem ·

       mâk       Qem·t    uâf         men·tu?         sa Râ
  protector of · Egypt · smiter of · the countries · son of Râ ·

  Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  suten    qen      ar    em      dedui·        f
        Ramses II. ·    king · triumph · made · at · the two hands · his ·

  khatf     her          ta      neb   dem            neb taui
   in · the face of · the land · all · entire · lord of the two countries ·

  User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ  sa Râ   Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su  du     ânkh   neb
        Ramses II. ·     son of Ra·     Ramses II. ·  giving · life · all ·

   ma Râ
  to-day (_literally_: like Râ).

_i. e._ Behold Pharaoh! He is _the heavenly Horus, the powerful bull, the
son of Ra_. He is _Ramses II., the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, the lord
of the Vulture_ and _Uræus diadems, who protects Egypt_ and _smites the_
foreign _nations_. He is _the Sun's offspring, Ramses II., a king_ whose
_hands have done warlike deeds in full view of the entire world_. He is
_the lord of the two countries_ [Egypt], _Ramses II., the Sun's offspring,
Ramses II., who gives all life now_ and forever.


{71}THE BASE [EAST, SOUTH, WEST, NORTH].

At the bottom of each of the four faces of the obelisk are two horizontal
lines of almost totally destroyed hieroglyphs. They bear the cartouches of
Ramses II., and are so written as to read from the centre each way. The
inscription is

  Râ-en-sotep-Râ-Mâ-User nefer nuter ânkh nuter nefer Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su
  Râ-en-sotep-Râ-Mâ-User nefer nuter ânkh nuter nefer Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su

      Ramses II. · gracious · god · life · god · gracious · Ramses II.
      Ramses II. · gracious · god · life · god · gracious · Ramses II.

  _i. e._ Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II._!
          Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II._!
          Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II._!
          Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II._!


_III. Inscriptions of Osarkon I._

Besides the three columns of hieroglyphs on each face of our obelisk, all
chiseled in large and bold characters, we find at the lower end of each
face near each edge inscriptions by a later king. The hieroglyphs of these
inscriptions are so minute and so mutilated as to be scarcely legible. They
seem to have started at the first of the lower cartouches and to have
extended to the two {72}horizontal lines at the bottom of the obelisk. As
each face has two of these columns, there are eight of these inscriptions
on the obelisk. The last half of the inscriptions is destroyed in each case
and may have been different on every column. The eastern column on the
south face is the most legible one and presumably reads thus

     suten-kaut?        kherp-kheper-Râ-sotep-en-Râ     sa Râ
  The king of Upper            Osarkon I. ·           the son of Râ ·
   and Lower Egypt ·

  Amen-mer-Ûsarken              ..........
     Osarkon I. ·     .........._illegible!_..........

_i. e._ _The king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Osarkon I., the Sun's
offspring, Osarkon I._, ..........


_IV. Inscriptions of Augustus._

There is no name of any other Egyptian ruler, except the three mentioned
above, inscribed on our obelisk. When the emperor Augustus, however, had
the London and New York Obelisks transported to Alexandria in 12 B. C., he
caused his name to be engraved on the crabs which supported them. Only two
of these crabs have come down to us and are preserved in the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in Central Park. On the only remaining claw of one of the
crabs are two inscriptions; on the one side in Greek and on the other in
Latin, which give the names of the emperor, prefect or governor, and
architect. Prof. Augustus Merriam of Columbia College has devoted some time
to the study of these inscriptions and has made some very remarkable
discoveries, which fix {73}the eighteenth year of the reign of Augustus as
the time of the reërection of the London and New York Obelisks in
Alexandria. The inscriptions are herewith given in fac-simile.

The Greek inscription reads

[Illustration]

which looks like this in regular Greek types:

  L [Greek: IÊ KAISAROS]          In the year · 18 · of Cæsar
  [Greek: BARBAROS ANETHÊKE]      Barbarus · erected (it).
  [Greek: ARCHITEKTONOUNTOS]      The architect being
  [Greek: PONTIOU]                Pontius.

_i. e._ The governor _Barbarus erected_ this obelisk _in the eighteenth
year of_ the reign of _the emperor_ Augustus (12 B. C.). _Pontius was the
architect._

The Latin inscription reads

[Illustration]

{74}which is in regular Latin types:

  ANNO XVIII CÆSARIS              In the year · 18 · of Cæsar
  BARBARVS PRÆF                   Barbarus · the prefect
  ÆGYPTI POSVIT                   of Egypt · erected (it).
  ARCHITECTANTE PONTIO            The architect being · Pontius.

_i. e._ _Barbarus, governor of Egypt, erected_ this obelisk _in the
eighteenth year of_ the reign of _the emperor_ Augustus (12 B. C.).
_Pontius was the architect._

The Greek letter _Psi_ ([Greek: Ps]) in the first line of the Latin text
seems to have been the initial of the engraver's name, who must have been a
Greek, if we can draw this inference from the beautiful Greek and the poor
Latin form of the letters in the inscriptions.


THE FULL TRANSLATION OF THE OBELISK.

As a recapitulation of the translation of the Egyptian inscriptions on our
obelisk, which has been given in the preceding pages, we now place the
complete translation of each face of the obelisk in a very compact and
simple form before our readers. The English translation will be found to
correspond to the hieroglyphs, and each word can be easily picked out on
the three columns of the original. All the words in _Italics_ are to be
found in the Egyptian text, while those in common Roman types are supplied
so as to render the inscriptions intelligible to the reader.

            _Thothmes III., gracious   _Râ-Hor-Khuti, the              {75}
            god, lord of               great god, the lord
            the two countries,         of the two countries,
            giving eternal life._      giving him all life._

            _The powerful and                _Wine:
            glorious bull in                 as a
            Thebes, the Sun's                gift._
            offspring, Thothmes III._

  Behold Pharaoh! He    Behold Pharaoh! He            Behold Pharaoh! He
  is _the heavenly      is _the heavenly              is _the heavenly
  Horus, the powerful   Horus, the powerful_          Horus, the powerful
  bull, the son of      and _glorious bull            bull, beloved of
  Khepera._             in Thebes._                   Râ._
  ----------------      ----------------              ----------------
  |  |  |  |  |  |      |  |  |  |  |  |              |  |  |  |  |  |
  He is _the king of    He is _the lord of the        He is _the King of
  Upper and Lower       Vulture_ and _Uræus diadems_, Upper and Lower
  Egypt, Ramses II.,    and his _kingdom is estab-    Egypt, Ramses II.,
  the golden Horus,     lished_ as firmly _as the     the Sun_ himself,
  who abounds in        sun in the heavens._ His      and _the child of
  years_ and _is great  name is: "_He whom Tum, the   the gods._ He is
  in victories._ He is  lord of Heliopolis, has be-   _master of the two
  _the Sun's offspring, gotten_ and who is _the son   countries, the Sun's
  Ramses II., who       of his loins, whom Thoth has  offspring, Ramses
  issued from the_      brought forth_", who _was     II._ He is _a youth
  Sun's _loins to       created by them in the great  glorious_ and _be-
  receive the diadems   temple_ of Heliopolis _in     loved like Aten,
  of Râ._ It is he      the beauty of their limbs_,   when he shines in
  _who brought forth    and _who knew_ beforehand     the horizon._ He is
  himself as sole       _what he would do to estab-   _the lord of the two
  ruler_ and _lord of   lish_ for himself _an etern-  countries, Ramses
  the two countries,    al kingdom._ He is _Thothmes  II., the Sun's off-
  Ramses II., the       III., the king of Upper and   spring, Ramses II.,
  Sun's offspring,      Lower Egypt, beloved of the   the glorious_ image
  Ramses II., the       great god Tum and his circle  _of Râ, who gives
  glorious_ image _of   of gods who gives all life,   life._
  Râ, now_ and forever. stability and strength now
                        and forever._

  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!

            _Thothmes III., gracious   _Tum, lord of the two           {76}
            god, lord of the two       countries, lord of Helio-
            countries, giving eternal  polis, the great god, the
            life._                     lord of_ his _temple,
                                       giving him all life._
            _The powerful_ and
            _glorious bull in                _Wine:
            Thebes, the Sun's                as a
            offspring, Thothmes              gift._
            III._

  Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is
  _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,
  the powerful bull, the  the powerful bull,      the powerful bull,
  son of Râ_.             beloved of Râ_.         beloved of Mâ_.
  ----------------        ----------------        ----------------
  |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |
  He is _the king of      He is _the king of      He is _the king of
  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,
  Ramses II., the lord    Thothmes III., who has  Ramses II., the lord
  of the Vulture_ and     made_ this to be _his   of festivals_, who is
  _Uræus diadems, who     monument_ in honor      _like his father Ptah
  protects Egypt_ and     _of_ his _father_ Tum,  of Memphis_. He is
  _smites_ all _the_      _the lord of Helio-     _the Sun's offspring,
  foreign _nations_. He   polis_, and who _has    Ramses II., a god_
  is _the Sun's off-      set up for him two      himself, _the morning-
  spring, Ramses II., a   large obelisks, the     star of the two coun-
  kind ruler like Râ,     pyramidion_ being cov-  tries_, who is well
  ...................     ered _with gold-metal,  _versed in the laws_
  ...................     on the first day of     and _awe inspiring in_
  ...................     the thirty-year fest-   his _works_. He is
  ...................     ival.... No one_ has    _the lord of the two
  the lord of the two     ever done what _he      countries, Ramses II.,
  countries, Ramses II.,  did, the Sun's off-     the Sun's offspring,
  the Sun's offspring,    spring, Thothmes III.,  Ramses II., who gives
  Ramses II., now_ and    the beloved of Râ-Hor-  life_.
  forever.                Khuti_, who lives
                          _forever_.

  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!

            _Tum, lord of Helio-       _The gracious god,              {77}
            polis, the gracious_ and   prince of Heliopolis,
            _great god, lord of_ his   king, lord of the two
            _temple, giving life,      countries, Thothmes III.,
            stability_, and            giving eternal life._
            _strength._
                                       _The powerful and
                                       glorious bull in Thebes,
            _Pouring out libation to   the Sun's offspring,
            receive from him life._    Thothmes III._

  Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is
  _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,
  the powerful bull,      the powerful_ and       the powerful bull, the
  beloved of Râ._         _glorious bull in       son of Râ._
                          Thebes._
  ----------------        ----------------        ----------------
  |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |
  He is _the king of      He is _the king of      He is _the king of
  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,
  Ramses II.,_ who is     Thothmes III., who has  Ramses II., the golden
  _the Sun_ himself and   embellished the house   Horus, who abounds in
  _the child of the       where he was born,      years_ and _is great
  gods._ He is _master    ...................     in victories._ He is
  of the two countries,   ...................     _the Sun's offspring,
  the Sun's offspring,    ...................     Ramses II._,
  Ramses II. ........     ...................     ...................
  ...................     ...................     ...................
  ...................     ...................     ...................
  No one has done_ what   ...................     ...................
  _he did in his          ...................     He is _the lord of the
  father's house._ He is  ...................,    two countries, Ramses
  _the lord of the two    the Sun's offspring,    II., the Sun's off-
  countries, Ramses II.,  Thothmes III., the be-  spring, Ramses II.,
  the Sun's offspring,    loved of Râ-Hor-Khuti,_ now_ and forever.
  Ramses II., who gives   who lives _forever._
  life._

  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                              Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!

            _The gracious god, lord_                                   {78}
            and _maker of things,      _Râ-Hor-Khuti, the lord
            king, lord of the two      of the two countries,
            countries, Thothmes III.,  giving him all life._
            giving eternal life._

            _The powerful_ and
            _glorious bull in Thebes,  _Pouring out libation to
            the Sun's offspring,       receive from him life._
            Thothmes III._

  Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is   Behold Pharaoh! He is
  _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,    _the heavenly Horus,
  the powerful bull,      lifting the white       the powerful bull, the
  beloved of Mâ._         crown, beloved of Râ._  son of Râ._
  ----------------        ----------------        ----------------
  |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |        |  |  |  |  |  |
  He is _the king of      He is _the king of      He is _the king of
  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,  Upper and Lower Egypt,
  Ramses II., the lord    Thothmes III., the      Ramses II., the lord
  of the festivals like   golden Horus, rejoic-   of the Vulture_ and
  his father Ptah._ He    ing in_ his _strength,  _Uræus diadems, who
  is _the Sun's off-      the vanquisher of the   protects Egypt_ and
  spring, Ramses II._     princes of the count-   _smites_ all _the_
  whom _Râ has begotten   ries which are dist-    foreign _nations._ He
  in order to gladden     ant._ He did this       is _the Sun's off-
  Heliopolis_ and _fill_  _because_ his _father   spring, Ramses II.,
  her _sanctuaries_ with  Râ had_ so _commanded   a king_ whose _hands
  treasures. It is he     him,_ and had given     have done warlike
  _who brought forth      him _victories over     deeds in full view of
  himself_ as _lord of    the entire world_, and  the entire world._ He
  the two countries,      had placed _an abund-   is _the lord of the
  Ramses II., the Sun's   ance of power on his    two countries, Ramses
  offspring. Ramses II.,  arm, so that he might   II., the Sun's off-
  who gives all life      enlarge the boundaries  spring, Ramses II.,
  now_ and forever.       of Egypt._ This was     who gives all life
                          done by _the Sun's      now_ and forever.
                          offspring, Thothmes
                          III., who gives all
                          life forever._

  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!
                  Long _life_ to _the gracious god, Ramses II_!




{79}CHAPTER VII

NOTES ON THE TRANSLATION AND THE CRABS.


§1. On looking over the translation of our obelisk, as set forth in the
preceding pages, the reader will perhaps feel disappointed in the substance
of its inscriptions. These contain, as has already been stated, only
laudatory phrases and vainglorious titles, and furnish us with no
historical data nor anything that would be of value to scholars. People
have for many centuries suspected them of an utterly different meaning, and
have given them the most fanciful and ludicrous explanations. For instance,
Athanasius Kircher in his "_Oedipus_" (published in 1650), when speaking of
our obelisk, says: "_It_ [the New York Obelisk] _sets forth the activity
and functions of the twelve solar genii in the world's government, which
result from their protection and presence, and with what rites and
ceremonies each of them must be propitiated; for each in his tour around
each of the four sides keeps watch over his particular quarter of the
world, which he both guards against the attack of the evil genii and
preserves_". All this, of course, is sheer nonsense. Besides this
ridiculous explanation Kircher mentions that at the base of our obelisk
were engraved the words [Arabic: MSLH FR`WN] "_Pharaoh's Needle_", which is
both improbable and impossible, though, as a matter of fact, the obelisk
always went by that name among the Arabs.

The most silly guess at a translation, however, is probably that of the
Mohammedan writer Ibn-el-Vardi, who visited Alexandria and saw our obelisk
there in 1340. He writes of it as follows:

{80}"_This is on it_ [the obelisk]: '_I, Ya`mer-ben-Shaddad, have founded
this city, when old age did not yet overtake nor death disturb nor gray
hairs trouble me, when stones were here in abundance, and men did not
acknowledge masters. I have built its porticoes, and dug its canals, and
planted its trees, and desired to embellish it with wonderful monuments and
amazing structures. I have sent my servant El·Thabut-ben-Marrat, the
`Adite, and Maqdam-ibn-El·`Amr-ben-abi-Re`al, the Thamudite, the caliph, to
Mount Tarim, the red mountain, and they cut out of it two rocks and carried
them both on their shoulders. Then one of the ribs of El·Thabut having been
crushed, I caused the people of my kingdom to make reparation. Now these
two_ [obelisks] _were erected for me by El·Fatan-ibn-Jarud, the Mutafakite,
on an auspicious day._'"

[Illustration]

The same writer then states: "_And this is the very obelisk which is in the
corner of the city looking toward the East, while the other is seen further
in the interior of the city._"

{81}This translation of our obelisk reads very strange and was, of course,
only drawn by that ancient author from his own fertile imagination. Still
it shows how much importance was even at that early time attached to our
monolith. Almost every traveler of note mentions it and gives a description
of it. All their scattered notices help us to trace the history of our
obelisk through the last few centuries, without, however, our gaining any
new or important knowledge from them.

NOTE. It may be of some interest to know that all the old writers agree in
calling the _erect_ obelisk in Alexandria "_Cleopatra's Needle_"; in other
words, this epithet was _only_ applied to the New York Obelisk in Central
Park. The claim of the English that their obelisk in London was ever named
after the famous queen rests on no foundation whatever.

§2. When the Romans transported our obelisk to Alexandria, its base was
badly damaged. That it might still be erected without planing off the
surface of the stone, they filled up the cavities with lead and put bronze
crabs in the corners. The reason why they should have selected the crab or
scorpion ([glyphs]) cannot be definitely given. It may have been due to the
strange superstition of the Egyptians of the Ptolemaic period. The figure
of the scorpion, the evil genius, plays an important part in the
astrological and mythological inscriptions of that time. From what the
Romans heard of this evil deity, and from a desire to propitiate it, they
thought the crab the most appropriate ornament for the obelisk. They wished
to convey a double meaning; first, that the obelisk, the emblem of the good
god of light, should restrain and keep down the evil deity of darkness, and
secondly, they made it appear, in order to flatter the evil genius, as
though it was he who sustained the good god's throne and kept his
{82}monument in proper position. Still, whatever the reason may have been,
the crabs are altogether out of place beneath our monolith.

The crabs at present supporting the obelisk are new, and were cast at the
Brooklyn Navy Yard. What is left of the old ones is preserved in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art in Central Park (cf. page 72). The following
inscriptions were engraved on the eight claws:

FIRST CRAB, FIRST CLAW:

    L. [Greek: Ê KAISAROS]           _ANNO VIII_
   [Greek: BARBAROS ANETHÊKE]    _AVGVSTI CAESARIS_
  [Greek: ARCHITEKTON OUNTOS]     _BARBARVS PRAEF_
       [Greek: PONTIOU]           _AEGYPTI POSVIT_
                                _ARCHITECTANTE PONTIO_

  [The corrected form and the translation of these inscriptions are given
  on page 73 and 74.]

FIRST CRAB, SECOND CLAW:

          QUARRIED AT SYENE, EGYPT; ERECTED AT
  [glyph] HELIOPOLIS, EGYPT, BY THOTHMES III IN THE
          SIXTEENTH CENTURY B. C.

SECOND CRAB, FIRST CLAW:

  REMOVED TO ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT, AND ERECTED
  THERE B. C. 22 BY THE ROMANS.

  [The date should be B. C. 12. Cf. page 73.]

SECOND CRAB, SECOND CLAW:

  REMOVED TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA A. D.
  1880, AND ERECTED IN NEW YORK CITY JANUARY 22,
  1881.

THIRD CRAB, FIRST CLAW:

  PRESENTED TO THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
  BY ISMAIL, KHEDIVE OF EGYPT.

{83}THIRD CRAB, SECOND CLAW:

  RUTHERFORD BURCHARD HAYES, PRESIDENT; WILLIAM
  MAXWELL EVARTS, SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE
  UNITED STATES.

FOURTH CRAB, FIRST CLAW:

  THE COST OF REMOVING FROM EGYPT AND PLACING
  ON THIS SPOT THIS OBELISK, PEDESTAL, AND BASE,
  WAS BORNE BY WILLIAM H. VANDERBILT.

FOURTH CRAB, SECOND CLAW:

  LIEUTENANT-COMMANDER HENRY H. GORRINGE,
  UNITED STATES NAVY, DESIGNED THE PLANS FOR AND
  SUPERINTENDED THE REMOVAL AND RE-ERECTION.




{84}CHAPTER VIII.

EGYPT: ITS GEOGRAPHICAL DIVISIONS AND ITS CITIES.


Egypt, called by its former inhabitants [glyphs] QEM·T, "_the black land_",
on account of the richness and color of its soil, and by the Greeks [Greek:
Aiguptos] [Aiguptos], has been correctly and appropriately described by the
ancients as "a gift of the river Nile", which flows throughout its entire
length. Lying between two vast tracts of desert land, and encompassed by
immense ranges of mountains, the Nile is its only source of life and means
of support. The country was divided from time immemorial into two large
sections, Upper and Lower Egypt. The Hebrew name of Egypt, [Hebrew:
MITSRAYIM] [Mizrayim], being a dual form, forcibly reminds us of this
division. These two sections were at various times of Egyptian history
independent principalities, and governed by different Pharaohs. Whenever
the two sections had one and the same ruler, he was always called [glyphs]
SUTEN-KAUT?, "_the king of Upper and Lower Egypt_", Upper Egypt as the more
important of the two always being mentioned first. These sections were
again subdivided into "_nomes_" (from the Greek word [Greek: nomos] [nomos]
"_a province_"), and each of them had its capital, governor, local deities,
sacred animals, and sacred trees.

{85}[Illustration]

{86}UPPER EGYPT, called by the Egyptians [glyphs] PA TA RES "_the land of
the South_", began in the south at the island of Philæ and extended as far
as the Delta in the north. It is called "Upper", being bounded by mountains
and highlands, as opposed to the low land of the north or "Lower" Egypt.
This section of the country comprised 22 nomes. Following the course of the
Nile some of the principal places and cities are:

  _Philæ_, in Egyptian [glyphs] AAREQ·T or [glyphs] PIREQ, one of the
  southern islands of the First Cataract, with the ruins of the magnificent
  temple of the goddess Isis, the fragment of an obelisk, and other
  monumental structures.

  _Elephantine_, in Egyptian [glyphs] ÂB·T "_the ivory-island_", the
  northernmost island in the First Cataract, opposite the modern Assuân. On
  it was situated the capital bearing the same name, ÂB, with the famous
  Nilometer and a splendid temple of Khnum, the local deity of the island.

  _Syene_, in Egyptian [glyphs] SUN·T, now Assuân, which was the site of
  the vast quarries, from which were taken most of the obelisks and statues
  scattered throughout Egypt.

  _Ombos_, in Egyptian [glyphs] NUBI·T, "_the gold-city_", with the road
  leading to the Nubian gold mines, was noted for its temple of the
  crocodile-headed god Sebek-Râ, its local deity. The modern name is
  Kôm-Omboo.

  _Silsilis_, the old Egyptian [glyphs] KHENNU, "_the sailor-city_", is
  known for its tombs which are cut into the mountain-side, its quarries,
  and its annual festivals in honor of the rise of the Nile at the time of
  inundation. The modern name of this part of the country is Jebel
  Selseleh.

  _Redesieh_, a modern village, was formerly the starting-point of an
  important road leading to Asia and the Red Sea. On this road is a temple
  of Seti I. and a {87}famous well, [glyphs] TA KHNUM·T MÂ-MEN-RÂ "_the
  well of Seti I._", constructed by order of the same Pharaoh.

  _Edfu_, in Egyptian [glyphs] DEB·T, "_the city of transfixion_"
  (referring to the legend of the battle between Horus and Set, the devil,
  in which the latter was pierced by the avenging spear of the son of
  Osiris), was the renowned city of the sun-god Horus. Because of his
  supreme worship it was also called [glyphs] HUD·T "_the city of the
  winged sun-disk_ [[glyphs]]". Here are to be found in a tolerably good
  state of preservation some of the grandest temple-buildings of Egypt. The
  temple of the hawk-faced sun-god, Horus, rivals in magnificence that of
  any other god.

  _El-Kab_, near the ancient city of [glyphs] NEKHEB·T, the Eileithyiapolis
  of the Greeks, contains the many dedicatory inscriptions to Nekheb, an
  otherwise rarely mentioned goddess, and a number of tombs.

  _Esneh_, in Egyptian [glyphs] SENI·T, was the seat of the Khnum-worship,
  and still contains the ruins of the temple of the ram-headed god
  ([glyphs]).

  _Hermonthis_, in Egyptian [glyphs] AN-MENTH, the modern village of
  Erment, was at one time a most important city of Egypt, surpassing even
  Thebes. Now we find here only a few ruins of the temple of the sun-god
  Menthu, the local deity of the place.

  _Thebes_, in Egyptian [glyphs] US·T "_the city of the Us-sceptre_", or
  [glyphs] NU·T AMEN "_the city of_ the god _Amen_", was situated on the
  land occupied at present by {88}the villages of Karnak and Luxor on the
  east, and Drah-abul-Neggah, Dêr-el-baheri, Qurnah, Medinet-Habu, and
  others on the west bank of the Nile. It was undoubtedly the largest city
  of the ancient world, and the principal seat of the worship of Amen or
  Amen-Râ. During the greater part of Egyptian history it was the capital
  of all Egypt. Nowhere on the face of the earth are so many ancient
  monuments gathered together as here. Suffice it to mention the wonderful
  temples of Karnak and Luxor in the city proper, which was called [glyphs]
  APIU·T "_the city of thrones_" (from which with the prefixed feminine
  article TA the word "Thebes" is derived) and a number of obelisks, and
  the Tombs of the Kings with their mausolea, especially the Memnonium of
  Ramses II., the monster statues of Amenophis III., and many other
  monuments in western Thebes.

  _Coptos_, in Egyptian [glyphs] QEBTI·T, the modern Kuft, at the end of
  the road leading from Kossêr on the Red Sea, was formerly a place of
  great commercial activity, and became a mart for the products of Arabia
  and the far East. On this road to Kossêr are the extensive quarries of
  Hammamât, the ancient [glyphs] DU EN BEKHEN "_the mountain of the
  bekhen-stone_".

  _Denderah_, in Egyptian [glyphs] AN·T, "_the city of pillars_", or
  [glyphs] TA-EN-TA-RER·T, with the grand and well-preserved temple of
  Hathor, [glyphs].

  _Abydos_, in Egyptian [glyphs] ABDU or [glyphs] ABDU·T, was especially
  famous for the temple of Seti I. Here also was said to be the tomb of the
  god Osiris near which it was the highest honor to be buried.

  {89}_El-Khargeh_, in Egyptian [glyphs] KENEM·TI, an oasis to the west of
  Thebes, at one time belonging to the VIIth nome of Upper Egypt.

  _Thinis_, in Egyptian [glyphs] THENI·T, was according to tradition the
  home of the first Egyptian Pharaoh, Menes. Its site is now probably
  occupied by the village of El-Tineh.

  _Panopolis_, the Greek designation for the city called [glyphs]
  PER-KHEM·T, "_the city of the temple of the god Khem_", the modern
  Akhmîm, was the seat of the worship of Khem whose festivals were
  conducted with various gymnastic exercises, especially that of climbing
  smooth poles represented thus: [glyphs].

  _Sioot_, the modern name of the ancient [glyphs] SAÎU·T, is at present
  the largest city of Upper Egypt. A number of rock-tombs are in the
  neighborhood. Its local deity was the jackal-headed god Anubis.

  _Tel-el-Amarna_ is the present site of a city founded by Amenophis IV.,
  which he named [glyphs] KHU EN ATEN, "_the glorious house of the sun-god
  Aten_". It was this king who introduced the sole worship of the sun-disk
  and was ever after considered a heretic. Cf. the picture on page 30.

  _Bersheh_ is a modern village with the remnants of some tombs. In one of
  them is the picture showing the mode of transporting a colossus (cf. page
  15).

  _Beni-Hassan_ is noteworthy for its beautiful sepulchral grottoes of the
  XIIth dynasty.

  _The Fayoom_ is a large tract of fertile land {90}extending into the
  Libyan desert. It was called [glyphs] TA SHETI, "_the land of the sea_",
  and the present name is derived from the Coptic word [Coptic: phiom]
  [phiyom], "_a sea_". In it was the world-famous Lake Moeris, which the
  Egyptians named [glyphs] MER ÛR, "_the great sea_" (whence the name
  "Moeris"). This was really a large reservoir constructed by Amenemhât
  III. Besides this we find here the ruins of the so-called Labyrinth, the
  palace of the same king, not far from the pyramid of El-Lahoon. The
  Greeks called the place Crocodilopolis from the crocodile-headed god
  Sebek, who was its local deity.

  _Meydoom_ is situated on the site of the ancient [glyphs] MER-TUM·T,
  "_the favorite city of the god Tum_", and is famous for its quaintly
  terraced pyramid.

LOWER EGYPT, called by the Egyptians [glyphs] TA MEHÎ·T, "_the land of the
flax plant_" or only simply [glyphs] MEH·T, "_the north_", comprises the
so-called Delta from the city of Cairo to the Mediterranean Sea. The Delta,
intersected by the seven arms of the river Nile, was called [glyphs] PA TA
MERA·T, "_the land of the inundation_", and was so named from its
resemblance to the Greek letter Delta, [Greek: D], our D. It was composed
of 20 nomes or provinces.

The following are the principal cities of Lower Egypt:

  _Memphis_, in Egyptian [glyphs] MEN-NEFER·T, "_the good place of rest_",
  which became in Coptic [Coptic: memphi] [Memphi], has left us hardly any
  vestige of its former greatness. It was the capital of Lower Egypt and
  the main seat of the worship of the god Ptah. Nothing remains to mark the
  site of the famous Memphis of old {91}except the colossus of Ramses II.
  at the village of Mîtrahîneh and the mighty pyramids. The latter consist
  of the following groups: 1) the three great Pyramids, namely, the Great
  Pyramid, "the Splendid", of king Kheops; the Second Pyramid, "the Great",
  of king Khefren; the Third Pyramid, "the Superior", of king Mycerinus:
  all these being at Gizeh: 2) the Pyramids of Abûsîr, four in number; 3)
  the Pyramids of Saccarah, the largest of which is called the Pyramid of
  the Steps on account of its strange form; 4) the Pyramids of Lisht and
  Dashûr. These pyramids served as mausolea or tombs of the kings who
  erected them. The stones of ancient Memphis were converted into
  building-stones for modern Cairo.

  _Tura_, the present site of the quarries of Memphis from which the stone
  for the pyramids was taken. It received the name of Troja [Troy] from the
  Greeks.

  _Heliopolis_, the ancient [glyphs] AN and the modern Matarîyeh, was the
  famous city of the Sun or the "City of Obelisks". Here stood the New York
  Obelisk in front of the temple of the Sun [Râ]. The only monument to be
  seen there still is the obelisk of Usertesen I.

  _Alexandria_, the famous city founded by Alexander the Great on the site
  of the ancient [glyphs] RÂQEDÎ·T, the Rhakôtis of the Greeks, is situated
  near the north-west corner of Egypt. To the south of it is the Lake
  Mareotis, in Egyptian [glyphs] MERÎ·T. Alexandria can boast of no ancient
  monument whatever, as its two obelisks have been conveyed to London and
  New York, and Pompey's Pillar is not of Egyptian workmanship.

  _Rosetta_ is a considerable town at the mouth of the Rosetta branch of
  the Nile. Its world-wide fame is due {92}to the fact that here a French
  engineer, Boussard, discovered in 1799 the stone which furnished the key
  for the interpretation of the Egyptian hieroglyphs.

  _Sais_, in Egyptian [glyphs] SA·T, whose site is at present marked by the
  lofty mounds of Sa-el-Hajar, was the seat of the worship of the goddess
  Neith, and the capital of all Egypt under three dynasties of kings.

  _Busiris_, in Egyptian [glyphs] PER-USAR·T, "_the house of Osiris_", now
  Abu-Sîr, was situated on the Damietta branch of the Nile and had Osiris
  for its local deity.

  _Tanis_, in Egyptian [glyphs] ZÂN·T, was situated to the south of Lake
  Menzaleh. At present there are only a few remnants of the many
  magnificent temples left to mark the site of that ancient city. It was
  the favorite residence of the Shepherd Kings or Hyksos.

  _Mendes_, in Egyptian [glyphs] PER-BA-NEB-DED·T, "_the house of the ram,
  the lord of stability_", was the seat of government under one dynasty of
  kings. Its sacred animal was the ram, which was the Egyptian emblem of
  the soul.

  _Bubastis_, in Egyptian [glyphs] PER-BAS·T, was the principal seat of the
  worship of the lion-faced goddess Bast or Pasht ([glyphs]). The ruins of
  her grand temple can still be partially seen near the present Tel-Basta.

  _Pelusium_ lies at the mouth of the most easterly branch of the Nile and
  was built either on or else near the site of the ancient Avaris, the
  Egyptian [glyphs] HA·T-ÛAR·T. This was the last stronghold of the Hyksos
  before they were driven out of Egypt.




{93}A GLOSSARY

OF NAMES AND TERMS OCCURRING IN THIS BOOK AND PERTAINING TO EGYPTOLOGICAL
SUBJECTS.

_The small numerals at the end of each item refer to the pages of the
book._


AAREQ·T. The Egyptian name of the island of Philæ. ^{86}

ÂB, ÂB·T, or ÂBU·T. The Egyptian name of the city and island of
Elephantine. ^{24 86}

ABDU or ABDU·T. The Egyptian name of Abydos. ^{88}

ABUSIMBEL. Also called Ipsambul. The ancient Aboccis or Abuncis. A place in
Nubia, situated on the Nile, and famous for its stupendous rock-temple of
Ramses II., the largest in the world. Each of the four statues at the
entrance represents the king himself, and is about seventy feet high. ^{27}

ABÛSÎR. A village near the site of ancient Memphis. Here we find four
pyramids, one built by Sahurâ, and another by Userenrâ, kings of the vth
dynasty. This place must not be confounded with that of the same name in
the Delta. ^{91}

ABU-SÎR. The modern name of the ancient Busiris. ^{92}

ABYDOS [pronounced ábidos]. The capital of the VIIIth nome of Upper Egypt.
^{88}

A. D. The Latin _Anno Domini_ "in the year of our Lord".

`ÂDITE. A person belonging to the ancient Arabic tribe of Âd. [The first
sign ` is an Arabic gutteral which cannot be pronounced in English.] ^{80}

AKHMÎM. The present site of the ancient Panopolis. ^{89}

ALBANI OBELISK. A small obelisk of Roman workmanship, formerly in the Villa
Albani near Rome, and at {94}present preserved in the _Glyptothek_ at
Munich, Germany. On it and its companion in Naples, the Borgian Obelisk, we
read the Roman names Tacitus ([glyphs]), Sextus ([glyphs]), and Africanus
([glyphs]). It was probably erected in the time of Domitian. ^{10}

ALEXANDER THE GREAT, or Alexander III. The son of Philip II., king of
Macedon. He was born B. C. 356 and died B. C. 323, and was one of the
greatest military conquerors the world has ever seen. His triumphant entry
into Egypt took place in 332, when he was welcomed by the Egyptians as
their liberator from the Persian yoke. He died while preparing for an
expedition against Arabia. His name in Egyptian is ^{32 91}

      suten-kaut?     Amen-mer-sotep-en-Râ     sa Râ         Aleksandres

  The king of Upper   "The beloved of Amen,    the Sun's
  and Lower Egypt,    the chosen of the Sun",  offspring,    Alexander.

ALEXANDRIA. The modern name of Rhakôtis, founded by Alexander the Great in
B. C. 332. Its main attractions were the tomb of Alexander, the palace of
the Ptolemies, a museum, the temple of Serapis (a Græco-Egyptian deity, a
combination of Osiris and the bull Apis), the world-famous Library, and the
Pharos or light-house, which was 400 feet high and one of the seven wonders
of the world. The city flourished until the Mohammedans gained possession
of it A. D. 650. On December 22d of that year the Library was burned by
Amru, the general of the caliph Omar. All antiquities in the city were then
destroyed except the two obelisks and Pompey's Pillar, which have come down
to us, the latter, however, being the only object of interest still in
Alexandria. The city at present has nothing to attract the antiquarian as
it is altogether too modern in appearance. ^{8 39 40 41 42 43 72 73 79 81
82 91}

{95}ALEXANDRIAN OBELISK. The former name of the obelisk at present in
London. It was the _prostrate_ one at Alexandria, which had been presented
to the English as early as 1820, but was removed in 1877, arriving in
London on January 20, 1878. The money for its removal, amounting to £10
000, was furnished by Prof. Erasmus Wilson, of London. ^{8 10 41 81}

ALNWICK CASTLE OBELISK. Perhaps the same as the Sion House Obelisk. It was
erected by Amenophis II., and only one face bears an inscription. It was
brought to England in 1840.--Alnwick Castle is situated to the north-west
of the town of Alnwick in Northumberland, England. ^{10}

AMEN. In Egyptian [glyphs] AMEN, "_the hidden god_". The Latinized form is
Ammon. He was the tutelary god of Thebes, and was addressed as "_the king
of the gods_". As such the Romans identified him with their Jupiter. He was
worshiped only in Upper Egypt, and is represented on the monuments with a
head-dress of two plumes or feathers, called SHENTI; thus [glyphs].
Although at first the invisible or hidden deity, he was afterwards merged
into Amen-Râ (which see). ^{35 63 87 88}

AMENEMHÂT III. A powerful king of the XIIth dynasty. To guard against a
time of drought and excessive inundation, he converted the Fayoom into a
vast reservoir of fresh water, which was known to the ancients as Lake
Moeris. Besides this he built two pyramids and a palace, the so-called
Labyrinth, near this lake. His name in Egyptian is ^{90}

    suten-kaut?      Râ-en-Mâ·t    sa Râ        Amen-em-hâ·t

  The king of Upper   "The Sun    the Sun's     "Resolute of
  and Lower Egypt,    of Truth",  offspring,     purpose".

{96}AMEN-MER-RÂ-MESES-SU. The family name of Ramses II. ^{7 62 63 64 65 66
67 68 69 70 71}

AMEN-MER-ÛSARKEN. The family name of Osarkon I. ^{38 72}

AMENÔPHIS II. A king of the XVIIIth dynasty, the son and successor of
Thothmes III. He reigned for about seven years, at one time besieged
Nineveh, made an expedition into Mesopotamia, and conquered the
desert-tribes of Asia. His tomb is at Abd-el-Qurnah in Thebes. In Egyptian
his name reads ^{6 10}

  suten-kaut?        Râ-â-kheperu        sa Râ      Amen-hotep-nuter-heq-An

  The king of Upper "The Sun, great in   the Sun's  "The peace of Amen,
  and Lower Egypt,   transformations",   offspring,  the god, the prince
                                                     of Heliopolis".

AMENÔPHIS III. The successor of Thothmes IV, a king of the XVIIIth dynasty,
a great warrior, a bold lion-hunter, and the builder of the two large
figures (colossi) of himself in the desert to the west of Thebes, one of
which was called by the Greeks the Vocal Memnon. His name in Egyptian is
written ^{16 88}

  suten-kaut?        Râ-Mâ-neb         sa Râ       Amen-hotep-heq-Us

  The king of Upper  "The Sun, the     the Sun's   "The peace of Amen, the
  and Lower Egypt,   lord of Truth",   offspring,   prince of Thebes".

AMENÔPHIS IV. A king of the XVIIIth dynasty, the son and successor of
Amenophis III. The worship of the Sun under the form of ATEN or ATEN-RÂ was
forcibly introduced by him. His temple at Tel-el-Amarna was torn down by
his successors, who considered him a heretic. His name in Egyptian is ^{29
30}

  suten-kaut?   Râ-nefer-kheperu-uâ-en-Râ  sa Râ  Amen-hotep-nuter-heq-Us

  The king of  "The Sun, beautiful in     the Sun's   "The peace of Amen,
  Upper and     transformations, the one  offspring,   the god, the prince
  Lower Egypt,  Sun",                                  of Thebes."

This he changed, after introducing the Aten-worship, to

     suten-kaut?     Râ-nefer-kheperu-uâ-en-Râ     sa Râ               {97}
      Khu-en-Aten

  The king of Upper   "The Sun, beautiful in      the Sun's    "The glory
  and lower Egypt,     transformations, the       offspring,    of Aten".
                       one sun",

AMEN-RÂ. In Egyptian [glyphs] AMEN-RÂ, "_the hidden Sun_". The supreme
deity of the Egyptians and really identical with the sun-god Râ. Before the
time of the XVIIIth dynasty he was worshiped as AMEN simply, and especially
at Thebes. Some of the grandest hymns in the Egyptian literature are
addressed to this god. In painted inscriptions his body is generally
colored light-blue. Cf. above under Amen. ^{29 37 88}

AMENTI. In Egyptian [glyphs] AMENTI, "_the concealed land_", and
undoubtedly related to [glyphs] AMENTI, "_the West_", as the Egyptians
thought that the Lower World lay toward the west where the sun set. It is
the region below the earth or Hades, where the departed spirits assembled,
and was said to be the dominion of the god Osiris. It was divided into "the
field of the blessed", called [glyphs] AANURU or AAHLU (the Greek Elysium),
"the place of rest", called [glyphs] KHER-NUTER, and "the place of the
condemned", called [glyphs] RUSETI. In "the hall of the two Truths" the
deceased was brought before Osiris, his heart weighed, and judgment
pronounced on him. Besides the various gods, such as Osiris, Horus, Thoth,
and Anubis, we also find here the four genii of Hades, [glyphs] AMSETH
(with the head of a man), [glyphs] HEPI (with the head of a monkey),
[glyphs] DÛAMUTF (with the head of a jackal), [glyphs] QEBEHSENEF (with the
head of a hawk). To these were attached "the forty-two assessors",
generally represented with the heads of various animals, who typified the
negation of the forty-two {98}sins [cf. Negative Confession] of the
Egyptian moral code. The book which treats in full of everything pertaining
to the Egyptian Hades is the so-called Book of the Dead or the Ritual,
which has been found in innumerable copies in the tombs and with the
mummies. ^{28 30}

AMYRTAEUS OBELISKS. Two small obelisks of a king of the XXVIIIth dynasty,
who revolted against Artaxerxes I., the king of Persia, but was conquered
and driven into the Delta. His two obelisks, which are made of dark green
basalt, are at present in the British Museum. His name in Egyptian is ^{10}

   nuter nefer  User-mâ·t-Râ-sotep-en-Amen   neb taui     Amen-rud-Amen-mer

  The gracious "Strong in Truth, the Sun,  the lord of  "Amyrtæus, beloved
      god,            chosen of Amen",      the two      of Amen".
                                           countries,

AN. The Egyptian name of Heliopolis. ^{51 52 53 56 58 69 91}

ANDROSPHINX. A Greek word ([Greek: Androsphinx]), which means "man-sphinx".
This is the figure of a lion with the head of a man, and typifies the
Pharaoh as the incarnation of divine wisdom. The Egyptian figure of the
androsphinx is [glyphs]. ^{46}

ANIMALS, SACRED. Zoölotria or animal-worship was carried on extensively in
Egypt from the earliest times down to the Christian era. The Apis-bull was
sacred to Ptah, the Mnevis-bull to Osiris, the cat to Bast, the cobra or
Uræus-snake to all deities, the cow to Hathor, the crocodile to Sebek, the
cynocephalus-monkey and the ibis to Thoth, the eel to Tum, the latus-fish
to Isis, the frog to Heqet, the hippopotamus to Taûrt, the jackal to
Anubis, the lapwing to Osiris, the lion to Sekhet, the ram to Ptah and
Khnum, the scarabæus-beetle to Kheper-Râ, the scorpion to Selq, the
sparrow-hawk to Horus, the shrew-mouse to Buto, and the vulture to {99}Mut.
The worship of these animals was in some instances, however, confined to a
province or city, for while an animal would be worshiped in one district,
it would be hunted down and killed in another. Some of these sacred animals
were also embalmed as mummies, especially the Apis-bull, the ibis, and the
cat.

ÂNKH. The Egyptian word for "life", written [glyphs]. This refers to
terrestrial as well as celestial life and carries with it our notion of
"eternal life". The sign resembles the St. Anthony's cross, and is called
the _crux ansata_ "the cross with a handle"). It occurs in almost every
Egyptian inscription and is represented as the most precious gift of the
gods to man. ^{29 46}

AN-MENTH. The Egyptian name of Hermonthis. ^{87}

AN·T. The Egyptian name of Denderah. ^{88}

ANTEF THE GREAT. A king of the XIth dynasty of whom we know almost nothing.
He erected a few small obelisks and was buried at El-Assasîf in Thebes. He
was a great hunter and delighted in dogs. His name in Egyptian, according
to Lepsius, is ^{9 11}

    suten-kaut?        Sekhem-Râ-ap-mâ·t           sa Râ          Antef-â

  The king of Upper    "The image of the Sun,     the Sun's     "Antef the
  and Lower Egypt,    the proclaimer of Truth",   offspring,      Great".

ANUBIS. In Egyptian [glyphs] ANPU. He was one of the chief gods in the
Lower World and was represented as a jackal-headed man. He was the deity of
the embalmers and the guardian of the mummies of the dead and their tomb,
whence his picture [glyphs]. The Book of the Dead in the chapter on the
"last judgment" portrays him in the act of weighing a person's heart on a
scale with reference to Truth ([glyphs] MÂ). If it was found {100}wanting,
the person was condemned to return to the earth as an unclean beast; if
found truthful, he enters into "the fields of the blessed". The sacred
animal of Anubis was the jackal. ^{89}

APIS. In Egyptian [glyphs] HEP. This bull was the sacred animal of Ptah
[others say Osiris], and was worshiped in Memphis. Its color was black, but
on the forehead was a white spot, on its back a mark like a sickle, and
under its tongue a lump of flesh similar to the sacred beetle ([glyphs]) or
scarab. It was worshiped for twenty-five years, when it was drowned and
another Apis sought. When found, it was escorted to the temple by the
priests and the rejoicing multitudes. The Apeium was the name of the temple
in which it was worshiped, and the Serapeum that of the building where its
sarcophagi were stored.

APIU·T. The Egyptian designation of the eastern part of Thebes or "_the
throne_" of Amen-Râ. It was the city proper, while the western part was
given up totally to the dead. Out of this word, with the prefixed feminine
article [glyphs] TA [TA APIU·T], the Greeks formed the word Thebes. ^{88}

ARABIA. This country was well known to the ancient Egyptians, especially
the southern part, which they called [glyphs] PUN·T. In the inscriptions of
queen Mâkarâ, published by Dümichen, we find the country and its precious
product of spices mentioned. An active trade was carried on between it and
Egypt from the earliest times. ^{88}

ARLES OBELISK. This obelisk at Arles, a city in southern France, is
uninscribed. Zoëga conjectures that it was brought to Arles by order of
Constantine the Great in A. D. 315. It is very doubtful, whether this
obelisk is {101}of Egyptian workmanship at all, as the rock resembles that
of the quarries near by. It is now in front of the City Hall at Arles, and
only contains inscriptions in honor of Louis XIV. and Napoleon III. ^{10
22}

ASIA. This has no Egyptian name. The Asiatic tribes, however, gave no end
of trouble to the Egyptian kings, and a continual warfare was kept up
against them. Prominent among them were the Kharu, the Rotennu, the Zahi,
and the Kheta or Hittites. The Hyksos were perhaps also Asiatics. ^{86}

ASSUÂN. The modern name of the ancient Syene, near the southern boundary of
Egypt, and situated on the First Cataract. Most of the Egyptian granite was
taken from its famous quarries. Its Egyptian name is [glyphs] SUN·T which
may be rendered "the city which _gives entrance_ into Egypt". ^{11 13 23 24
86}

ASSUÂN OBELISK. The monster-obelisk still in the quarry of Syene and not
yet detached from its native rock. It would have been the largest obelisk
in existence. Three of its sides are finished, but have no inscriptions.
^{11}

ATEN or ATEN-RÂ. In Egyptian [glyphs] ATEN, "the sun's disk". This deity
was represented as the sun stretching out many hands which carried the
symbol of life, [glyphs] ÂNKH. At one time, under Amenhotep IV. and his
queen Thiî, it became for a short time the supreme deity of Egypt, but
after that was worshiped as only a form of Râ, and sank back to a secondary
place. ^{62 63 89}

ATMEIDAN OBELISK. It was erected by Thothmes III., perhaps in Heliopolis. A
single column of hieroglyphs extends down each face, and the lower end is
broken off. Constantine the Great [A. D. 306-337] seems to have had it
removed to Alexandria, where it remained until its transportation to
Constantinople in the reign of {102}Theodosius the Great [A. D. 379-395].
It is now in the Atmeidan or Hippodrome in Constantinople. ^{9}

ATUM. In Egyptian [glyphs] ATUM (the last sign being here only a
determinative). Another form of Tum. ^{29 51}

AUGUSTUS CAESAR. The first Roman emperor whose full name was Caius Julius
Cæsar Octavianus. He reigned from B. C. 30 to A. D. 14, and, besides his
many grand achievements, ordered the two obelisks in Heliopolis (at present
in London and New York) to be erected in Alexandria. His name in Egyptian
is ^{8 25 32 39 72 73 74 82}

    nuter neb taui       Auteqreder         sa Râ         neb khâu

  The god, the lord of  "Autocrator,"      the Sun's      the lord of
  the two countries,                      offspring,       diadems,

  Qîsers-ânkh-zeta-Ptah-As·t-mer

      "Cæsar, living forever,
     beloved of Ptah and Isis".

AUTOCRATOR. The Greek [Greek: Autokratôr] "absolute ruler". This was a
title of the Roman emperors and is our "autocrat". The Egyptians placed the
word in either of the two cartouches of the emperors, and wrote it in many
different ways; for instance, [glyphs] (Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius),
[glyphs] (Caligula), [glyphs] (Nero), [glyphs] (Trajan), [glyphs]
(Caracalla), &c. ^{39}

AVARIS. A city on the Bubastic branch of the Nile in the Delta, near the
ancient Pelusium. Its Egyptian name was [glyphs] HA·T-ÛAR·T. It was the
last fortified stronghold of the Hyksos which was besieged and taken by
Aahmes I., a king of the XVIIth dynasty. ^{92}

BANNER-SHIELD. The oblong that contains the one established royal title and
which, in all inscriptions of importance, must precede the cartouches,
[glyphs]. It occurs twelve times on our obelisk. ^{56 57 58 59 60 62 63 65
66 67 68 70}

{103}BARBARUS. A prefect or governor of Egypt. According to Prof. Merriam
his full name is Publius Rubrius Barbarus. History is silent about him.
^{39 73 74 82}

BARBERINI OBELISK. Other designations for it are: Monte Pincio Obelisk,
Veranian Obelisk, and the Obelisk della Passeggiata. It was cut in Egypt by
order of Hadrian [A. D. 118-138] and erected in honor of Antinoüs, who
drowned himself in the Nile in order to avert the fulfillment of an evil
oracle from the emperor. Pope Urban VIII. (Barberini) found it broken in
three pieces, and it was placed in its present position on the Monte Pincio
in Rome by Pius VII. in 1822. It has two columns of hieroglyphs on each
face. ^{9}

BAST. The Egyptian lion-headed goddess of love, also called Pasht or Sekhet
(which see). ^{92}

B. C. An abbreviation for "Before (the birth of) Christ".

BEJIJ. Also called Ebjij. A city in the western half of the XXIst nome of
Upper Egypt, whose Egyptian name was [glyphs] HA-SEBEK, "_the home of the
god Sebek_", the Crocodilopolis of the Greeks and Romans. ^{5 11}

BEJIJ OBELISK. A prostrate and broken obelisk of Usertesen I. at Bejij in
the Fayoom. It resembles more a stelé than an obelisk, as it has two large
and two small faces and a rounded top, which is the usual form of a stelé.
^{11}

BELZONI, Giovanni Battista. One of the most successful Egyptian explorers
[died Dec. 3, 1823]. He was the first to penetrate the second large pyramid
of Gizeh. ^{13}

BENEVENTO. A city of Italy, north-east of Naples. Its Egyptian spelling on
the obelisks erected by the emperor Domitian is [glyphs] BENEMTHESTI. ^{8
10}

BENEVENTO OBELISKS. Two obelisks bearing the cartouche of the emperor
Domitian [A. D. 81-96]. One of {104}them, having only a single column of
hieroglyphs on each face, is erected in a public square, while the other is
imbedded in the wall of a house in Benevento. The names of Domitian, Titus,
and Lucilius Lupus appear in the inscriptions. ^{10}

BENI-HASSAN. The present name of the place where the sepulchral grottoes of
the XIIth dynasty were situated. These rock-tombs were in the XVIth nome of
Upper Egypt, the most famous one of them being that of [glyphs]
KHNUM-HOTEP. ^{89}

BERSHEH. The modern name of a place in the XVth nome of Upper Egypt, the
site of many rock-tombs. ^{15 89}

BOBOLI GARDENS OBELISK. A small obelisk at present in the Boboli Gardens at
Florence, Italy. It was probably erected in Heliopolis by Ramses II. and
removed to Rome by the emperor Claudius [A. D. 41-54]. How it got to
Florence is not known. ^{10}

BONOMI, Joseph. An English Egyptologist [died 1808]. ^{11}

BOOK OF THE DEAD. Also called the Egyptian Ritual. A collection of chapters
treating of the future state of the blessed in the realm of eternal life.
It is also in part a catechism with questions and answers. Innumerable
copies of it have been found written on papyrus and linen, some of them
displaying beautifully executed pictures and vignettes. The first complete
copy (of Turin, Italy) was published by Lepsius in 1842, the last by
Naville in 1886. ^{33 34}

BORGIAN OBELISK. A small obelisk in the Museum of Naples, Italy, bearing a
single column of hieroglyphs. It was perhaps erected by Domitian, and had
an inscription similar to that of the Albani Obelisk (which see). It was
found at Præneste near Rome in 1791 and was formerly in the Borgian Museum
at Velletri. ^{10}

{105}BOUSSARD. A French engineer in the army of Napoleon I., who discovered
the Rosetta Stone at Fort St. Julien in 1799. ^{92}

BRUGSCH, Heinrich. The greatest living Egyptologist and disciple of
Lepsius. He was born in Berlin on Feb. 18, 1827, and is at present
Professor of Egyptology in the same city. ^{26}

BUBASTIS. Now Tel-Basta. The capital of the XVIIIth nome of Lower Egypt,
the [Hebrew: PIY-VESET], _Pi-Beseth_, of the Bible (Ezek. xxx: 17), and
called by the Egyptians [glyphs] PER-BAS·T, "_the home of the goddess
Bast_". The temple of this deity, the goddess of love, is now a mass of
ruins. ^{92}

BÛLÂK. The port of Cairo. Here is the famous "Musée Boulaq", the national
Egyptian Museum, founded by the French Egyptologist Mariette (died 1881).
^{38}

BUSIRIS. Now Abu-Sîr, situated about half-way down the Damietta branch of
the Nile. The capital of the IXth nome of Lower Egypt, called in Egyptian
[glyphs] PER-USAR·T, "_the house of Osiris_", and by the Copts [Coptic:
pousiri] [Pûsiri], whence the Greek Busiris. ^{92}

BYZANTIUM. An ancient Greek city on the Bosphorus, now occupied by the city
of Constantinople. It was founded about B. C. 667, and was for a long time
the capital of the Eastern Greek Empire. ^{8}

CAESAR. At first the surname of the Roman gens (or house) Julia, but after
the time of Augustus the title of the Roman emperors. The word was applied
indiscriminately to all the emperors, but stands for Augustus on our
obelisk-crab. ^{73 74 82}

CAESAR-ÂNKH-ZETA-PTAH-AS·T-MER. The family name of the emperor Augustus
(which see). ^{39}

CAESAREUM. A temple in Alexandria dedicated to the {106}Roman emperors,
where divine honors were paid them. ^{39}

CAIRO. The capital of Egypt, situated twelve miles above the place where
the Nile resolves itself into its seven branches. It was founded about A.
D. 973 on the site of the former town of Fostât ([Arabic: ALFSTAT]). The
stones of ancient Memphis helped to build up the city. The Arabic name of
Cairo is El-Kâhira ([Arabic: ALQAHRH] "_the victorious city_"). ^{1 5 11 36
38 90 91}

CAIRO OBELISK. This is said to have formed part of a gate-way in Cairo. It
has now disappeared, but may be identical with one of the Amyrtæus
Obelisks. ^{11}

CALIGULA, Caius Cæsar. The third Roman emperor (A. D. 37-41), whose name in
Egyptian is ^{8}

   suten-kaut?         heq-hequ-Autegreder-Ptah-As·t-mer

  The king of Upper   "The lord of lords, Autocrator,
  and Lower Egypt,     the beloved of Ptah and Isis",

  sa Râ                   Qaîs-Kaîseres-Kermanîqis-ânkh-zeta

  The Sun's offspring,   "Caius Cæsar Germanicus, living forever".

CALIPH. A title of a high dignitary among the Mohammedans. The Arabic form
is [Arabic: KHLYFH] _Khalifa_, which means "the successor of the Prophet
(Mohammed)". ^{80}

CAMBYSES. A king of Persia who conquered Egypt in 527 B. C., overthrowing
and putting to death Psametik III. He was a ruthless destroyer of Egyptian
monuments and acted like a demoniac. His name is ^{1}

    suten-kaut?       Mesuth-Râ    sa Râ       Kembathet

  The King of Upper   "The son    the Sun's    "Cambyses".
  and Lower Egypt,      of Ra",   offspring,

CAMPENSIS OBELISK. Also called the Monte Citorio {107}Obelisk in Rome. It
stood formerly on the Campus Martius, whence its name. Erected by Psametik
II. in Heliopolis, and removed by the emperor Augustus in 20 B. C. to Rome,
it was found broken in five pieces in 1748, and was re-erected by Pius VI.
in 1792. Unlike the other obelisks it has two columns of hieroglyphs on
each face. ^{9} (^{25})

CARKHEMISH. A city on the Euphrates and the capital of the vast Hittite
empire, now called Jerablûs. It is also mentioned in the Bible (Isa. x:9;
Jer. xlvii:2; II Chron. xxxv:20). Many important battles were fought at
this place. On the Egyptian monuments it is called [glyphs] KARUKAMSHA.
^{36}

CARTOUCHE [pronounced kartoósh]. An oval ring or seal containing the
Pharaoh's name. The Egyptian figure of it is [glyphs] REN, which means "a
name". Every king had two such cartouches, the first being his royal or
divine name which he adopted on his accession to the throne, and the second
being the family name which he bore as prince. The first is generally
introduced by the phrase "_The king of Upper and Lower Egypt_", and the
second by "_The son of Ra_". The cartouches may be written in vertical or
horizontal lines; thus [glyphs] or [glyphs] This is the usual form though
variants are not of infrequent occurrence. These cartouches would also
sometimes contain the names of gods, goddesses, queens, princes, and
princesses, when the phrases introducing them were changed accordingly.
[Also spelled _cartouch_.] ^{36 37 38 39 49 57 71}

CATANIA OBELISK. A small obelisk standing on a stone elephant and set up in
front of the Cathedral in {108}Catania, Sicily. It is only a Roman
imitation, having eight sides and four columns of hieroglyphs in all. ^{10}

CATARACTS OF THE NILE. There are a number of cataracts formed by the Nile,
where it passes over rocks and boulders, the largest and longest being the
First Cataract. This forms the southern boundary of Egypt, and lies between
Syene and Philæ. ^{24 86}

CHRONOLOGY, EGYPTIAN. The ancient Egyptian chronology is hopelessly
tangled. Some of the dates may be correct, especially those of the later
dynasties, but when we turn to the early history of Egypt we are confronted
by such a confusion of facts and dates, that makes the fixing of dates for
the earlier dynasties an impossibility. There is a difference of more than
3000 years between the dates assigned by various Chronologists to the reign
of the first king of Egypt, Menes; Böckh setting it down as B. C. 5702,
Unger as 5613, Mariette and Lenormant as 5004, Brugsch as 4455, Lauth as
4157, Lepsius as 3892, Bunsen as 3059, Poole as 2717, and Wilkinson as
2691. No scheme of chronology can be deduced from the monuments, for the
ancient Egyptians cared nothing about history, a fact that is proved by the
carelessness with which they recorded historical events. The big numbers
above result from the supposition that the various dynasties reigned in
succession, while some were undoubtedly contemporaneous. An important list
of kings together with their dates, written in the third century B. C. by
Manetho, an Egyptian priest, has come down to us. We herewith give his list
as systematized by Lepsius.

MYTHOLOGICAL PERIOD.

TWO DYNASTIES OF GODS. 13 870 YEARS.

ONE DYNASTY OF DEMI-GODS. 3 650 YEARS.

ONE DYNASTY OF PREHISTORIC KINGS OF THINIS. 350 YEARS.

{109}HISTORICAL PERIOD.

I. OLD EMPIRE. 1.-11. DYNASTIES. B. C. 3892-2380.

1ST DYNASTY OF THINIS, 3892 TO 3639.

  _Kings_: Mena (Menes). Teta. Ateth (Athothis). Ata. Hesepti (Usaphaïs).
  Merbapen (Miëbis). Semenptah (Semempses). Qebeh.

2D DYNASTY OF THINIS, 3639 TO 3338.

  _Kings_: Bazaü (Boëthos). Kakaü (Kaiëkhos). Baënnuter (Binothris).
  Uaznes. Senda (Sethenes). Perabsen. Neferkarâ (Nepherkheres).
  Neferkaseker (Sesokhris). Hezef.

3D DYNASTY OF MEMPHIS, 3338 TO 3124.

  _Kings_: Zazaî. Nebka. Zeser (Tosorthros). Teta. Sezes. Zeserteta
  (Tosertasis). Ahtes (Akhes). Nebkarâ. Neferkarâ (Nekherophes).

4TH DYNASTY OF MEMPHIS, 3124 TO 2840.

  _Kings_: Snefru (Soris). Khufu (Suphis or Kheops). Khâfrâ (Sophris or
  Khephren). Menkaürâ (Menkheres, Mycerinus). Dedefrâ. Shepseskaf.
  Sebekkarâ (Seberkheres).

5TH DYNASTY OF MEMPHIS, 2840 TO 2592.

  _Kings_: Userkaf (Userkheres). Sahurâ (Sephres). Neferarikarâ
  (Nepherkheres). Shepseskarâ (Sisires). Neferkhârâ (Kheres). Rânuser
  (Rathures). Menkaüher (Menkheres). Dedkarâ (Tankheres). Unas (Onnos).

6TH DYNASTY OF ELEPHANTINE, 2744 TO 2546.

  Contemporaneous with the fifth dynasty. _Kings_: Teta. Atî (Othoës). Pepî
  (Phiops I.). Heremsaf. Pepî (Phiops II.). Netaqerti (Nitokris).

7TH DYNASTY OF MEMPHIS, 2592 TO 2522.

8TH DYNASTY OF MEMPHIS, 2522 TO 2380.

9TH DYNASTY OF HERACLEOPOLIS, 2674 TO 2565.

10TH DYNASTY OF HERACLEOPOLIS, 2565 TO 2380.

  The kings of these four dynasties were more or less contemporaneous. The
  exact position of their names in the lists cannot be given. _Kings_:
  Neferka. Neferseh.... Ab. Neferkaürâ. Kharthî (Akhthoës). Neferkarâ.
  Neferkarânebî. Neferkarâkhendu. Merenher. Seneferka. Kanrâ.
  Neferkarâtererel. Neferkaher. Neferkarâpepîseneb. Neferkarâânnu.
  Neferarkarâ.

11TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 2423 TO 2380.

  Contemporaneous with the eighth and tenth dynasties. _Kings_: Antef I.
  Menthuhotep I. Antef II. Antef III. Antef IV. Antef V. Sarâanâ. Antuf.
  Antufâ. Antef the Great. Anantef. Seneferkarâ. Userenrâ. Nebnemrâ.
  Menthuhotep II. Menthuhotep III. Menthuhotep IV.


II. MIDDLE EMPIRE. 12.-17. DYNASTIES. B. C. 2380-1591.

12TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 2380 TO 2167.

  _Kings_: Amenemhât I. (Ammenemes I). Usertesen I. (Sesortasis I.).
  Amenemhât II. (Ammenemes II.). Usertesen II. (Sesortasis II.). Usertesen
  III. (Sesortasis III.). Amenemhât III. (Ammenemes III.). Amenemhât IV.
  (Ammenemes IV.). Sebekneferurâ (Sebeknophris).

13TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 2136 TO 1684.

14TH DYNASTY OF XOIS, 2167 TO 1684.

  The kings of these two dynasties reigned contemporaneously. _Kings_:
  Sebekhotep I. Sebekhotep II. Sebekhotep III. Sebekhotep IV. Neferhotep.
  Sebekhotep V. Sebekhotep VI. Sebekhotep VII. Aï. Sebekhotep VIII.

15TH DYNASTY, THE HYKSOS, 2101-1842.

  Contemporaneous with the thirteenth and fourteenth dynasties. _Kings_:
  Apehutiset. ...banân (Banon). Abehenkhepesh. Apepa (Apophis).

{110}16TH DYNASTY, THE HYKSOS, 1842 TO 1591.

  Contemporaneous with the thirteenth and fourteenth dynasties. _Kings_:
  Apepa. Aqenenrâ.

17TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 1684 TO 1591.

  Contemporaneous with the sixteenth dynasty. _Kings_: Seqenenrâ I.
  Seqenenrâ II. Seqenenrâ III. Kames. Aähhotep. Aähmessapaär.


III. NEW EMPIRE. 18.-30. DYNASTIES. B. C. 1591-340.

18TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 1591 TO 1443.

  _Kings_: Aähmes I. (Amosis). Aähmesnefertari (Nephris). Amenhotep I.
  (Amenophis I.). Thothmes I. (Tûthmosis I.). Thothmes II. (Tûthmosis II.).
  Mâkarâ (Mephre). Thothmes III., the Great (Tûthmosis III.). Amenhotep II.
  (Amenophis II.). Thothmes IV. (Tûthmosis IV.). Amenhotep III. (Amenophis
  III.). Amenhotep IV. Sâqanekhtkheperurâ. Tutânkhamen. Aî. Heremheb
  (Horos).

19TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 1443 TO 1269.

  _Kings_: Ramses I. (Ramésses I.). Setî I. (Sethos I.). Ramses II., the
  Great (Ramésses Miammûn). Merenptah I. (Menephthes). Amenmeses. Setî II.
  (Sethos II.). Merenptah II. (Menephthes Siphthas). Setnekht
  (Sethnekhthes).

20TH DYNASTY OF THEBES, 1269 TO 1091.

  _Kings_: Ramses III. (Ramésses III.). Ramses IV. (Ramésses IV.). Ramses
  V. (Ramésses V.). Ramses VI. (Ramésses VI.). Ramses VII. (Ramésses VII.).
  Ramses VIII. (Ramésses VIII.). Ramses IX. (Ramésses IX.). Ramses X.
  (Ramésses X.). Ramses XI. (Ramésses XI.). Ramses XII. (Ramésses XII.).
  Ramses XIII. (Ramésses XIII.). (Ramésses XIV.)

21ST DYNASTY OF TANIS, 1091 TO 961.

  _Kings_: Samenthu (Smendes). Pasebkhânu I. (Phusemes). Asehrâ (Osokhor).
  Amenemapt (Amenophis). Pasebkhânu II. (Psinakhes). _Opposition-kings of
  Thebes_: Herher. Païnezem I. Païnezem II. Païnezem III.

22D DYNASTY OF BUBASTIS, 961 TO 787.

  _Kings_: Sheshenq I. (Sesonkhis I. or Shishak). Osarkon I. (Osorkhon I.).
  Takelot I. (Takelothis I.). Osarkon II. (Osorkhon II.). Sheshenq II.
  (Sesonkhis II.). Takelot II. (Takelothis II.). Sheshenq III. (Sesonkhis
  III.). Pamaî. Sheshenq IV. (Sesonkhis IV.).

23D DYNASTY OF TANIS, 787 TO 729.

  _Kings_: Pedusabast (Petsybastis). Osarkon III. (Osorkhon).

24TH DYNASTY OF SAIS, 729 TO 685.

  _King_: Bakenrenf (Bokkhoris). _Opposition-kings of Ethiopia_: Piânkhî I.
  Piânkhî II.

25TH DYNASTY OF ETHIOPIA, 716 TO 664.

  Contemporaneous with the twenty-fourth and twenty-sixth dynasties.
  _Kings_: Shabaka (Sebikhos). Shabataka (Sebitikhos). Taharqa (Teärkhos).
  Amenrud.

26TH DYNASTY OF SAIS, 685 TO 525.

  Partly contemporaneous with the twenty-fifth dynasty. _Kings_: Psametik
  I. (Psametikhos I). Nekaü (Nekhao II.). Psametik II. (Psametikhos II.).
  Uahabrâ or Apries (Uaphris). Aähmes II. (Amosis). Psametik III.
  (Psametikhos III.).

27TH DYNASTY, THE PERSIANS, 525 TO 405.

  Contemporaneous with the twenty-eighth dynasty. _Kings_: Kembathet or
  Cambyses (Kambyses). Antarîush or Darius I. (Dareios Hystaspes).
  Khshîarush or Xerxes I. (Xerxes the Great). Artakhshashs (Artaxerxes).
  Anthrîsh or Darius II. (Dareios Xerxes).

28TH DYNASTY OF SAIS, 525 TO 399.

  _Kings_: Amenrud or Amyrtæus (Amyrteos I.). Khabbash.

29TH DYNASTY OF MENDES, 399 TO 378.

  _Kings_: Niafâurud (Nephorites I.). Hager (Akhoris). Psimut (Psamuthis).

{111}30TH DYNASTY OF SEBENNYTUS, 378 TO 340.

  _Kings_: Nekhtherheb or Nectanebo I. (Nekhtharebes). Taher (Teos).
  Nekhtnebef or Nectanebo II. (Nekhthanebos).

_Manetho's list ends with this dynasty, the names of the following dynasty
having been added by some other writer. All the names here given in
parentheses are from his list._


IV. EGYPT UNDER FOREIGN RULE, B. C. 340-A. D. 395.

31ST DYNASTY, THE PERSIANS, B. C. 340 TO 332.

  _Kings_: (Okhos). (Arses). (Dareios). These names do not occur on the
  Egyptian monuments.

32D DYNASTY, THE MACEDONIANS, B. C. 332 TO 305.

  _Kings_: Aleksandres or Alexander the Great. Phîulîupûs or Philippus
  Aridæus. Aleksandres or Alexander II.

33D DYNASTY, THE PTOLEMIES, B. C. 305 TO 30.

  _Kings_: Ptolemy I. Soter I. Ptolemy II. Philadelphus. Ptolemy III.
  Euergetes I. Ptolemy IV. Philopator I. Ptolemy V. Epiphanes. Ptolemy VI.
  Eupator. Ptolemy VII. Philometor. Ptolemy VIII. Philopator II. Ptolemy
  IX. Euergetes II. Cleopatra III. Ptolemy X. Soter II. Ptolemy XI.
  Alexander I. Berenice III. Ptolemy XII. Alexander II. Ptolemy XIII. Neos
  Dionysios. Cleopatra VI. Ptolemy XVI. Cæsarion.

34TH DYNASTY, THE ROMANS, B. C. 30 TO A. D. 395.

  _Emperors_: Augustus. Tiberius. Caligula. Claudius. Nero. Galba. Otho.
  Vespasian. Titus. Domitian. Nerva. Trajan. Hadrian. Antoninus Pius.
  Aurelius. Verus. Commodus. Severus. Caracalla. Geta. Decius. ..........
  A. D. 251.

Egyptian history ends here as far as the monuments are concerned, for
Decius is the last Roman emperor mentioned by them. Prominent among the
succeeding emperors are Gallienus, Aurelian, Probus, Diocletian,
Constantine the Great, Constantius, and Theodosius the Great. The emperors
of the Eastern Roman Empire, called the Byzantines, rule over Egypt from A.
D. 395 to 638. The Mohammedans then conquer the country in 638, and have
remained in possession until now. One of the best of these rulers or
Khedives was the late Ishmael Pasha.

"CITY OF OBELISKS." A designation of Heliopolis. ^{1 91}

"CITY OF THE SEVEN HILLS." A designation of Rome which was originally built
on seven hills. ^{25}

"CITY OF THE SUN." The translation of the Greek word [Greek: Hêlioupolis]
[Hêliûpolis], which is An or Heliopolis. ^{36 51}

CLAUDIUS. The fourth Roman emperor (A. D. 41-54). His full name is Tiberius
Claudius Drusus Nero Germanicus. In the Egyptian inscriptions he is called
^{8}

    suten-kaut?       Auteqreder-Kîsers    sa Râ    Qertus-Dabarsa

  The king of Upper     "Autocrator      the Sun's    "Claudius
  and Lower Egypt,         Cæsar",       offspring,    Tiberius".

CLEOPATRA II. The sister and wife of Ptolemy VII. Philometor, and
afterwards wife of her brother Ptolemy IX. Euergetes II. She reigned with
them at intervals, {112}but all by herself from B. C. 130 to 127. Her name
and that of Ptolemy IX. on the Obelisk of Philæ were the first that were
read after the discovery of the Egyptian alphabet by François Champollion.
Her Egyptian name is ^{7}

  sen·t·f      him·t·f    heq·t         neb taui               Qlûapedra·t
  His sister, his wife,  mistress, lord of the two countries,  "Cleopatra".

CLEOPATRA VI. The famous and infamous queen after whom the New York Obelisk
is named, though incorrectly. She was born B. C. 69, married her brother
Ptolemy XIV. in 52, combined with Julius Cæsar in 49, and dethroned her
brother who was soon after that drowned. In 47 she married her second
brother Ptolemy XV. whom she poisoned in 44. She then made her own son by
Julius Cæsar, Ptolemy XVI. Cæsarion, co-regent with herself, but, falling
in love with Mark Antony, killed her son and placed her lover on the throne
in 37. At the very height of her power she was vanquished by Octavius, who
became afterwards the emperor Augustus, and died with Mark Antony in 30 B.
C. Her Egyptian name is ^{39 40}

    heq·t              neb taui                 Qlûpeter
  The mistress,   lord of the two countries,   "Cleopatra".

"CLEOPATRA'S NEEDLE." The usual designation of the New York Obelisk.  ^{8
10 41 42 81}

COLOSSUS. A Greek word [Greek: Kolossos], "a gigantic statue". ^{15}
COLOSSI OF THEBES. The two colossal statues of Amenophis III., one of them
being the Vocal Memnon. Besides them there are at Thebes several others,
notably of Ramses II. (Luxor and Karnak) and of Ramses III.
{113}(Medînet-Habu). Other colossal figures of Ramses II. are found at
Mitrahîneh [Memphis] and, wrought into the rock, at Abusimbel. ^{16 89}

CONSTANTINE THE GREAT. The first Roman emperor of that name and the
introducer of Christianity into the whole empire. He was sole ruler of the
Eastern and Western Roman Empires from 323 to 337 A. D. ^{8 10 22}

CONSTANTINOPLE. The capital of the Turkish Empire, founded by Constantine
the Great 330 A. D. on the site of the ancient Byzantium. It is called in
Turkish Istambûl [Arabic: ASTANBWL]. ^{8}

CONSTANTIUS II. A son of Constantine the Great who was sole ruler of the
Roman Empire from 351 to 361 A. D.  ^{8}

COPTIC LANGUAGE. The name given to the Egyptian language [Coptic being an
abbreviation for Egyptic] in use at the time of the Romans and spoken until
the seventeenth century of our era. There were three dialects, the Sahidic
(of Upper Egypt) and the Memphitic and Bashmuric (of Lower Egypt). The
language was almost exclusively used by the Christian Copts. The alphabet
is the Greek with some changes in the form of the letters and six additions
from the Hieroglyphic. This is the alphabet: ^{90}

Coptic: [Coptic letters]

Greek: [Greek: a b g d e z ê th i k l m n x o p r s t u ph ch ps ô]

              _a b g d e z ê th i k l m n x o p r s t u ph kh ps ô_

and the syllabic sign [Coptic: ti] _ti_.

COPTOS. The capital of the Vth nome of Upper Egypt, {114}the modern Kuft
[Arabic: QFT]. Its Egyptian name was [glyphs] QEBTI·T. ^{88}

CORFE CASTLE OBELISK. This was one of the two obelisks in front of the
temple of Isis at Philæ and was erected by Cleopatra II. and Ptolemy IX. It
has one column of inscriptions on each face and the cartouches of these
sovereigns. Below is a very long Greek inscription which enabled
Champollion to read these cartouches. The obelisk was removed in 1815 by
Belzoni to England, and is at present in Corfe Castle, Isle of Purbeck,
Dorsetshire. ^{10}

CRAB. In reality the scorpion, which was the symbol of the goddess Selq, a
form of the goddess Isis. Its name in Egyptian is [glyphs] SERK or [glyphs]
SERQ. It must have been quite extensively worshiped in Dakkeh, Nubia, which
received from it the name [glyphs] PESERK·T, the ancient Pselcis. In
Ptolemaic times the crab or scorpion seems to have been identified with the
evil genius. ^{21 38 39 81}

CROCODILOPOLIS. The capital of the western half of the XXIst nome of Upper
Egypt, the HA-SEBEK of the Egyptians, now Bejij in the Fayoom (which see).
^{5 11 90}

CROWNS OF EGYPT. To correspond with the divisions of Egypt there were two
crowns; the one called HEZ "_the white one_" ([glyphs]), signifying Upper
Egypt, and the other DESHER "_the red one_" ([glyphs]), signifying Lower
Egypt. Whenever the king ruled over all Egypt these two crowns were joined
into one [glyphs], which was called [glyphs] SEKHEN·T in Hieroglyphic, but
in Demotic, with the prefixed article PE, PSKHENT, or the Greek word
[Greek: pschent] [pskhent]. This crown was worn by kings and gods. ^{31 60}

DAMASCUS. The capital of Syria. It is called in the Bible [Hebrew: DAMESEQ]
[Dammêseq], in Arabic [Arabic: DMSHQ] [Dimashku], {115}and in Egyptian
[glyphs] THEMESQU, and was the extreme limit of the conquest of Thothmes
III. in northern Palestine. ^{36}

DAMIETTA. A small town situated between the Damietta branch of the Nile and
Lake Menzaleh, and at present called Dumyât. It is perhaps the site of the
ancient Egyptian [glyphs] HA·T-NEBES·T. ^{92}

DASHÛR. A village near the site of the ancient Memphis and only a short
distance from a number of small and two large pyramids. ^{91}

DEB·T. The Egyptian name of Edfu. ^{87}

DEHUTI. The ibis-faced god whose name is written in Egyptian [glyphs]
DEHUTI. The usual way of writing this god's name is Thoth (which see).
^{56}

DEHUTI-MESES. The family name of Thothmes III. in its simplest form. ^{49
58 60 61}

DEHUTI-MESES-NEFER-KHEPERU. One of the variants of the family name of
Thothmes III., which means "_the child of Thoth, beautiful in his
transformations_". ^{58 60 61}

DELTA. The northern part of Egypt or Lower Egypt lying around the seven
branches of the Nile. This part of the country forms a vast triangle and,
because of its resemblance to their letter D [[Greek: D] Delta], was called
by the Greeks "the Delta". Its Egyptian name is [glyphs] PA TA MERÂ·T,
"_the land of the inundation_". ^{84 90}

DEMOTIC. The third kind of Egyptian writing which was formerly also called
"_enchorial_" or indigenous. It was the simplest form in which the Egyptian
picture-characters were written, and was introduced in the reign of
Psametik I. [7th century B. C.]. Being read from right to left like the
Hieratic, it was employed for the same class of literary work as this. The
ease, however, {116}with which it could be written made it most suitable
for every-day use, and it supplanted the Hieratic almost completely. It was
itself superseded in the time of the Roman emperors by the Coptic (which
see). It was called in Hieroglyphics (on the Rosetta Stone) [glyphs] SEKHI
EN SHÂÎ "_writing of the books_".

The Demotic alphabet is here subjoined.

[Illustration]



DENDERAH. The capital of the VIth nome of Upper Egypt, called in Egyptian
[glyphs] or [glyphs] AN·T, "_the city of pillars_", or [glyphs]
TA-EN-TA-RER·T, "_the city of {117}the province encompassed by a wall_" or
[glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], &c., TA-RER·T, the Greek
Tentyra. The goddess Hathor or Venus was worshiped here in one of the most
magnificent temples of Egypt. ^{88}

DENYS OF TELMAHRE. Or Dionysius Tell-Mahrâyâ. A native of Tell-Mahrê, a
village near the junction of the rivers Euphrates and Balîkh in Syria, not
far from Antioch. He was patriarch of the Jacobites (818-845 A. D.) and a
great Syriac writer. ^{19}

DÊR-EL-BAHERI. "_The northern monastery._" A place opposite Thebes on the
western bank of the Nile, famous for the magnificent temple of queen
Hatasu. Here were discovered in 1881 the mummies of many kings and queens,
and among them those of the great Pharaohs Thothmes III., Seti I., Ramses
II., and Ramses III. ^{88}

DIADEMS. Besides the crowns (cf. page 114) there are two diadems always
specially mentioned, which also refer to the Pharaoh's power and rule over
Upper and Lower Egypt, the diadems of the Vulture and the Uræus snake or
cobra, expressed thus: [glyphs] [pronunciation very uncertain!]. Some other
forms of royal head-gear or diadems were the helmet [glyphs] KHEPERESH, the
[glyphs] or the simple head-dress, and most of the crowns with which the
gods are represented. ^{56 57 70}

DOMITIAN. The eleventh Roman emperor (81-96 A. D.), whose name in Egyptian
is ^{5 7 8 9 10 22}

       nuter                                Râ sa
      neb taui        Autugretur Kîsers    neb khâu        Tumtînes ent khu

  The divine lord      "Autocrator   the Sun's offspring,  "Domitianus, the
  of the two countries,   Cæsar".    the lord of diadems,   glorious" _or_,
                                                            _Augustus_.

DRAH-ABUL-NEGGAH. The modern name of a portion of the necropolis of ancient
Thebes on the western bank {118}of the Nile with many royal tombs of the
XIth, XVIIth, and beginning of the XVIIIth dynasties. ^{9 11 88}

DRAH-ABUL-NEGGAH OBELISKS. Two obelisks found at this place, near Thebes,
in 1878, each broken into several pieces. They belong, perhaps, to the XIth
dynasty, and would then be next to the Lepsius Obelisk the oldest in
existence. ^{9 11}

DÜMICHEN, Johannes. One of the triad of the greatest living Egyptologists
[the two others being Brugsch and Ebers]. He is at present Professor of
Egyptian in the University of Strassburg, Alsace. (The author's teacher.)
^{61 100}

DYNASTY. A set of kings belonging to one family. For a list of the
thirty-four Egyptian dynasties, see under: Chronology.

EDFU. Modern name of the Apollinopolis of the Greeks and Romans, or the
Egyptian [glyphs], DEB·T, "_the city of transfixion_" or [glyphs], HUD·T,
"_the city of the winged sun-disk_". It was the capital of the IId nome of
Upper Egypt, its local deity being Horus, who was identified by the Greeks
with Apollo, the sun-god; whence the city's name. ^{31 87}

EGYPT. The oldest empire of the world, comprising the north-east corner of
Africa and extending from the First Cataract to the Mediterranean Sea. Its
modern name is [Arabic: MSR] [Misr], and some of its Egyptian names are
[glyphs], QEM·T, [glyphs] or [glyphs], BEQ·T, [glyphs] or [glyphs], MER·T,
&c. It was the seat of the first civilization and in its golden age--in the
time of the XIXth dynasty--the mistress of the world. At present it has
lost all its prestige and is being ruined by Mohammedan misrule. For its
divisions, &c., see pages 84 to 92.

EGYPTIAN RITUAL. See under: Book of the Dead. ^{34}

{119}EILEITHYIAPOLIS. The Greek name of the Egyptian city [glyphs]
NEKHEB·T, "_the city of_ the goddess _Nekheb_", a deity whom the Greeks
identified with their Eileithyia (the goddess of childbirth) and the Romans
with their Lucina. It was the capital of the IIId nome of Upper Egypt.
^{87}

ELECTRUM. The name given by the ancients to an alloy of gold (4 parts) and
silver (1 part). Some consider the so-called Egyptian gold-metal [glyphs],
USEM, to be identical with it. ^{59}

ELEPHANTINE. [Pronounced Elefanteenay.] The Greek name of the town and
island in the first nome of Upper Egypt, opposite Assuân. The Egyptian name
(which the Greeks only translated) is [glyphs] or [glyphs], ÂB or ÂB.T
[ÂBU·T], "_the ivory island or city_". The cataracts of Elephantine, called
[glyphs], QERTI, were regarded by the ancient Egyptians as the source of
the Nile. ^{4 24 29 86}

EL-KAB. The modern name of Nekhebt or Eileithyiapolis, which see. ^{87}

EL-KHARGEH. The present name of the oasis to the west of Thebes, called in
the inscriptions [glyphs], KENEMTI, "_the wine-land_". It formed at one
time a part of the VIIth nome of Upper Egypt. In it stood a large temple of
Amen-Râ. ^{89}

EL-LAHOON. A village close to the Fayoom, the site of the pyramid of
Amenemhât III. (according to Lepsius) or Usertesen II. (according to
Brugsch). The modern name is derived from the Egyptian [glyphs], RUHUN·T,
"_the mouth of the canal_." ^{90}

EL-THABÛT-BEN-MARRAT. A mythical person. ^{80}

EL-TINEH. The modern name of the ancient Thinis, the {120}Egyptian
[glyphs], THENI·T, the first capital of the VIIIth nome of Upper Egypt,
which was at one time a very important city and the home of the first two
Egyptian dynasties. ^{89}

ELYSIUM. The Greek [Greek: Êlusion] [êlûsion]. The abode of the blessed or
the "Elysian Fields", called in Egyptian AANURU or AAHLU (see page 97).

ERMENT. The present name of the ancient Hermonthis or the Egyptian [glyphs]
AN-MENTH, "_the city of the pillar of_ the god _Menthu_", the capital of an
independent district to the west of the IVth nome of Upper Egypt. ^{87}

ESMEADE OBELISK. An obelisk formerly in the Esmeade garden near the Porta
del Popolo in Rome and only a Roman imitation. ^{11}

ESNEH. The present name of the capital of the IIId nome of Upper Egypt,
called in Egyptian [glyphs] ANÎ·T or [glyphs] SENI·T. Its sacred animal
according to Strabo, a Greek geographer, was the fish Latus (cf. page 98),
and its chief deities were Khnum and Neith. The ancients named the city
Latopolis. ^{87}

"ETERNAL CITY." A classical expression for the city of Rome, which was said
to have been founded by the gods and to be under their constant protection.
^{5}

ETHIOPIA. See under Nubia.

FAYOOM. The modern name of the tract of land which lay formerly in the XXth
and XXIst nomes of Upper Egypt, south-west of the Pyramids. Its local deity
was the crocodile-faced god Sebek, whence its name among the ancients,
Crocodilopolis. In it is the famous Lake Moeris, as well as the Labyrinth
and the pyramids of El-Lahoon and Meydoom. In Arabic the name is written
[Arabic: ALFYWM] [el-fayûm]. ^{4 5 89}

{121}FLAMINIAN OBELISK. Also called the obelisk of the Piazza del Popolo,
in Rome. It was erected in Heliopolis by Seti I., and re-erected by the
emperor Augustus in the Circus Maximus in Rome. After it had fallen Pope
Sixtus V. removed the pieces of the obelisk and set them up in the present
position [in 1589]. The inscriptions are by Seti I. and Ramses II.; the
latter having appropriated the greater portion. From this obelisk the
priest Hermapion (4th century A. D.) made the first attempt to decipher the
Egyptian hieroglyphs. The result of his investigations appears extremely
ridiculous to us at the present day. ^{9}

FLORENCE OBELISKS. Two small obelisks with two columns of hieroglyphs on
each face. They are at present in the Egyptian Museum at Florence. ^{10}

GIZEH. The site of the monster-pyramids and the Sphinx. It is situated in
the former Ist nome of Lower Egypt, and was the necropolis of ancient
Memphis. ^{4 91}

GREECE. The first mention of the Greeks in history is in the inscriptions
of the temple of Karnak, in which an incursion by them into Egypt at the
time of Menephthah I. [XIXth dynasty] is described. The tribes mentioned
there are the Akaüsha (Achæans), the Tursha (Etruscans), the Luku
(Lycians), the Sharutana (Sardinians), and the Shakalusha (Sicilians). On
the Rosetta Stone the Greeks are called [glyphs] HAUINEBU.

HADES. The Lower World, the abode of the departed spirits. The Egyptian
Amenti, which see. ^{28 30}

HADRIAN. The fourteenth Roman emperor [117-138 A. D.]. On the Barberini
Obelisk occur the names of his wife [glyphs] SÂBINA·T, Sabina, and of his
{122}favorite page [glyphs] ÂNDÎNES, Antinoüs. The emperor's name in
Egyptian is ^{5 7 9 22}

      nuter           Autukerter Kîsers      Râ sa               Atrînes
     neb taui              Terînus          neb khâu             enti khu

  The divine lord of  "Autocrator Cæsar  the Sun's offspring,   "Hadrianus
  the two countries,       Trajanus",    the lord of diadems,    Augustus".

HAMMAMÂT. In the Vth nome of Upper Egypt, near Panopolis and on the road
leading from this city to Kossêr, on the Red Sea. The Greeks called it
[Greek: porphyritês oros] [porphurîtês óros] "_the porphyry-mountain_" on
account of the excellent stone that was quarried here. ^{16 23 88}

HARMACHIS. The Greek transcription of the Egyptian [glyphs] HOR-EM-KHUTI,
"_Horus in the two horizons_". This deity represents the sun at noon. Its
symbolic representation was the sphinx, and its principal sanctuary was
built between the paws of the Great Sphinx at Gizeh in front of the Pyramid
of Kheops. (^{30})

HATASU. Or HASHEPES. A famous queen of the XVIIIth dynasty, the sister of
Thothmes III. and at first co-regent with him. She despatched the first
fleet mentioned in history to Arabia and the Somali Coast, where she
obtained spices, perfumes, trees, &c. Her name in Egyptian (with masculine
titles!) is ^{6 9 11 19 23 35}

     suten-kaut?          Mâkarâ          sa Râ   Amen-khnum·t-hâ·t-shepesu

  The king of Upper  "Truth, the image  the Sun's      "Filled with Amen,
   and Lower Egypt,     of the Sun",    offspring,    chief of the nobles".

HATASU OBELISKS. The two largest obelisks in Egypt, erected by queen Hatasu
in Karnak. Only one of them is erect. One line of hieroglyphs extends down
on each {123}of their faces, while their pyramidia were originally capped
with "gold-metal". These obelisks were quarried at Assuân, removed,
polished, inscribed, and erected in the incredibly short space of seven
months, as their inscriptions record. ^{19 23}

HATHOR. An Egyptian goddess who was represented in many ways; viz., like
Isis with the disk of the sun between two horns, or with a cow's head with
the disk between the horns, or as a spotted cow with plumes and the sun's
disk, or as a hawk with a female face and surmounted by the horns and the
disk. The Greeks identified her with their Aphrodité and the Romans with
their Venus, the goddess of love. She was the special guardian of the
Egyptian queens. Her hieroglyphic name is [glyphs] or [glyphs] HA·T-HER,
"_the house of Horus_". ^{88}

HA·T-ÛAR·T. The Egyptian name of Avaris or Pelusium. ^{92}

HELIOPOLIS. The Greek name of the Egyptian [glyphs] AN, at present
Matarîyeh, near Cairo, the biblical [Hebrew: 'WON] [ôn]. It was the capital
of the XIIIth nome of Lower Egypt, and one of the most famous cities of
antiquity. It was sacred to the sun-gods Râ and Tum. ^{1 2 4 9 10 19 21 36
51 52 53 56 57 58 69 82 91}

HELIOPOLIS OBELISK. The only remaining and erect obelisk at Heliopolis. It
has one column of hieroglyphs on each face and was erected by Usertesen I.
of the XIIth dynasty. Its companion fell in 1160 A. D. and has completely
disappeared. Its apex was originally covered with a capping of gilded
bronze, which was still seen by the Arabic physician Abd-el-Latîf in the
thirteenth century A. D. ^{9}

HERMONTHIS. See under Erment. ^{87}

HERSCHEL, Sir John Fred. William. A famous English astronomer. Died May 11,
1871. ^{13}

{124}HIERATIC. A more cursive form of the Hieroglyphic script, with fewer
characters, and signs drawn only in outline. It was mostly used for state
documents, letters, and scientific and religious papyri. The form of the
characters varies according to the individual handwriting of the scribe.
The Hieratic, like the Demotic, is always written from right to left. It
was the second kind of Egyptian writing, and its alphabet is as follows.
^{34}

[Illustration]

HIEROGLYPHIC. The name for the monumental language of ancient Egypt. The
words are composed of hieroglyphs or "sacred carvings", which were at first
quite simple but in the time of the Ptolemies became very complicated and
enigmatical. The alphabet is given above under: Hieratic. Besides the
simple letters there are also some two thousand syllabic signs and
ideographs. The characters were written either {125}horizontally from left
to right [thus in the hieroglyphic type of this book] or from right to left
[thus on pages 71, 75, and 76], or else vertically, with the characters
below each other, from left to right or from right to left. Hieroglyphic
was the writing of the priests.

HITTITES. The biblical name of an Asiatic people, the hereditary foes of
the Egyptians. They were called by them Kheta, which see. ^{36 37}

HOMER. The famous Greek poet, author of the Iliad and the Odyssey. ^{2 37}

HOR-HUD·T. The name of Horus as he was worshiped at Edfu. ^{31}

HOR-KHUTI, or HOR-EM-KHUTI. The sun-god at his appearance in the horizon in
the morning and at noon. From this word, which means "_Horus of the two
horizons_", the Greeks coined the word Harmachis. ^{29 30}

HOR-NUB. "_The golden Horus._" This title may also be translated "the
victorious Horus", referring in the first place to the victory of this god
over the devil, Set (cf. page 87), and then to the personal bravery of his
representative on earth, the king. ^{60 64 68}

HOR-RÂ. A form of the solar deity, a combination of Râ and Horus. ^{30}

HORUS. One of the greatest of the Egyptian deities, the son of Osiris and
Isis. He personified the Sun in his midday power, and his sacred bird was
the hawk. He was the divine representation of the Pharaoh himself. On the
monuments we find him pictured in many ways; viz., [glyphs], [glyphs],
[glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs],
[glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs],
[glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs], &c. ^{28 29 30 31 57 58 69 60 61 62
63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 87}

"HOUSE OF THE SUN." An appellation of Heliopolis. ^{2}

{126}HUD·T. The Egyptian name of Edfu, which see. ^{87}

HYKSOS. Syrian invaders who conquered Egypt and founded the XVth and XVIth
dynasties. According to Manetho (cf. page 108) the word signifies
"shepherd-kings" and is probably the Egyptian [glyphs] HEQ, "_prince_"
[glyphs] SHASU, "_the Bedouins_", whence "Bedouin prince(s)". They
introduced the sole worship of the ass-headed deity Set or Sutekh (which
see). They were cruel masters and were finally driven out of the country by
Aahmes I. of the XVIIth dynasty (cf. page 102). ^{92}

IBN-EL-VARDI. An Arabic historian who died in the year 750 of the Hégira
[the flight of Mohammed from Mecca to Medîna], about 1350 A. D. The passage
from this author on page 80 is also given by the Arabic geographer Edrisi
(1153 A. D.). ^{79}

ILIAD. The famous Greek epic of Homer, recounting the story of the siege
and capture of Troy, in Asia Minor. ^{37}

INTAGLIO-RELIEVO. The usual mode of carving employed by the Egyptians,
where the figures were cut altogether into the stone, that is, all below
the surface of the stone. ^{18}

ISHMAËL or ISMAÏL. Ex-Khedive of Egypt, an able but extravagant ruler, who
did much for the prosperity of that downtrodden country. In his reign the
Suez Canal was completed. ^{40 82}

ISIS. The great Egyptian goddess in the triad: Osiris, Isis, and Horus. She
was the queen of heaven and the wife of Osiris, whose members she gathered
after Set, the devil, had slain him. Her name in Egyptian is [glyphs] AS·T,
and she is represented with a throne on the head; thus, [glyphs], [glyphs],
[glyphs]. ^{86}

JEBEL SELSELEH. "_The mountain of the chain._" The modern name of that part
of the country where the ancient {127}Silsilis was situated. An Arabic
legend states, that at one time a chain was stretched across the Nile at
this point to ward off the approach of the enemy's ships, whence the name.
^{86}

JOSEPH. The biblical patriarch. His name has not yet been discovered on the
monuments, though there is much in the Egyptian literature to remind us of
his story; viz., in the Ameni inscription, describing the years of famine,
and the "Tale of the Two Brothers", setting forth the great temptation and
the wicked accusation. ^{2}

KADESH. A town in Syria where Ramses II. defeated the Hittites. In Egyptian
[glyphs] QEDESH. ^{35}

KARNAK. A modern village on the east side of the Nile, marking the site of
ancient northern Thebes. ^{2 3 6 9 10 11 19}

KARNAK OBELISKS. There are still at Karnak six obelisks: two large ones of
Thothmes I., one of them being prostrate and broken; two of queen Hatasu
(which see); and two small ones, resembling stelé and bearing the name of
Thothmes III. ^{9 10 11 19}

KENEMTI. The Egyptian name of the oasis El-Khargeh, which see. ^{89}

KHARU. A Syrian tribe subdued by Seti I. ^{36}

KHEDIVE. The Persian word [Arabic: KHDYF] [khedîf] signifying "the
monarch". This is the title of the governor of Egypt. ^{40 44 82}

KHEFREN. The Greek form of the Egyptian KHÂFRÂ, a king of the fourth
dynasty, and the builder of the second Great Pyramid of Memphis (Gizeh).
His name in Egyptian is [glyphs] SUTEN-KAUT? KHÂ·F RÂ, "_The king of Upper
and Lower Egypt, His glory is Ra_". ^{91}

{128}KHENNU. The ancient name of Silsilis, in Egyptian [glyphs] [glyphs]
and at present Jebel Selseleh, which see. ^{86}

KHEOPS. The Greek form of KHUFU, which see. ^{91}

KHEPER. An Egyptian deity symbolizing the creative energy of the sun, which
is the source of all life. The deity is frequently represented as a man
with the scarab or beetle on his shoulders, instead of a head. His name in
Egyptian is [glyphs], which is derived from the verb [glyphs] KHEPER, "_to
create_". ^{28 29}

KHEPERA. The same as the above. In Egyptian [glyphs] KHEPERA. ^{63 64}

KHERP-KHEPER-RÂ-SOTEP-EN-RÂ. The royal name of the king Osarkon I. ^{38 72}

KHETA. An Asiatic people, the Hittites of the Bible, where they are called
[Hebrew: CHITIYM] [khittîm]. They are constantly mentioned in the Egyptian
inscriptions, especially in those that treat of the wars of Seti I. and
Ramses II. Their Egyptian name is [glyphs], KHETA. ^{36 37}

KHNUM. The spirit of Amen-Râ, represented as a ram-headed deity; thus,
[glyphs], [glyphs], [glyphs]. He was especially worshiped at Elephantine,
and his figure was painted a bright green. His Egyptian name is [glyphs]
Khnumu. ^{86 87}

KHNUM-RÂ. A form of the solar deity, a combination of Râ and Khnum. ^{29}

KHUFU. A king of the fourth dynasty, the builder of the Great Pyramid at
Gizeh, the Kheops of the Greeks. His name in Egyptian is written [glyphs]
SUTEN-KAUT? KHUFU, "_The king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Khufu_". ^{5}

{129}KIRCHER, Athanasius. A German scholar and mathematician, who
endeavored to solve the mysteries of the Egyptian language, but signally
failed in the attempt. He died in 1680. ^{79}

KÔM-OMBOO. "_The hill of Omboo._" The modern name of the Egyptian [glyphs]
NUBÎ·T, "_the gold-city_", called Ombos by the ancients, a city in the
first nome of Upper Egypt. The crocodile-headed god Sebek was worshiped
here. ^{86}

KOSSÊR. "_Small castle._" A town in Egypt situated on the Red Sea, to which
a road led in ancient times from Coptos by way of Hammamât. The Greeks
called it Leukos-Limen, "_the white harbor_". ^{23 88}

KUFT. The modern name of Coptos, which see. ^{88}

LABYRINTH. The grand palace of Amenemhât III. in the Fayoom, described by
the Greek geographer Strabo. At one corner of it was the Pyramid of Howara,
which is built of brick. The name Labyrinth seems to be derived from the
Egyptian [glyphs] RUPU RUHUN, "_the temple at the mouth of the canal_" (see
under El-Lahoon). ^{90}

LATERAN OBELISK. The largest of all the erect obelisks, in front of the
church of St. Giovanni in Laterano, in Rome. It was ordered to be made by
Thothmes III., but was completed by Thothmes IV., who added the outer
vertical lines and erected the obelisk in front of the temple of Amen in
Thebes. It was removed to Alexandria by Constantine the Great, but was
taken to Rome by Constantius in 357. After its fall it was re-erected by
Sixtus V. in 1588. ^{9 20 23 25}

LEPSIUS, Richard K. The so-called "father of Egyptology", the teacher of
the great Egyptologists of the present day. His greatest work was the
_Denkmäler {130}aus Ægypten und Æthiopien_. He was born Dec. 23, 1810, and
died July 10, 1884. ^{4 5 36 37}

LEPSIUS OBELISK. A small obelisk discovered by Lepsius in a tomb at Gizeh
in 1843. It is the smallest obelisk known and at present in the Berlin
Museum. ^{4 10}

LIBYAN DESERT. The large tract of barren country to the west of Egypt,
containing seven oases (see under El-Khargeh). ^{59 90}

LISHT, PYRAMID OF. A small pyramid between those of Dashûr and Meydoom,
situated near the Fayoom. ^{91}

LONDON OBELISK. The present name of the Alexandrian Obelisk, which see.
^{25 39 40 59 72 73 81 91}

LOWER EGYPT. The northern part of Egypt, comprising the Delta. ^{16 31 51
65 90}

LUXOR. A village in the southern part of ancient Thebes on the east side of
the Nile. ^{2 4 9 10 88}

LUXOR OBELISKS. There are two obelisks of this name. One was brought to
Paris in the reign of Louis Philippe of France, and erected on the Place de
Concorde on Oct. 24, 1836. The cost of its removal was about $500 000. The
other is now standing in Luxor.--Both obelisks stood originally, side by
side, in front of the temple of Amenophis III. in Thebes, and are the most
artistic obelisks extant. They were erected by Ramses II. ^{8 9 10 23 41}

MÂ. An Egyptian deity, called the daughter of Râ. Her name signifies
"Truth", and she plays an important part in the theology of the ancient
Egyptians. She represents the truth and justice of the supreme god. Hence
the Pharaohs received her attributes and were called "truthful and just",
or, as the inscriptions express it [glyphs] MÂ MER, "_the beloved of Ma_".
Her name is written [glyphs] MÂ [really MAÂ] or [glyphs] MAÂ·T. ^{65 68 69}

{131}MÂÂD BOAT. The boat of Râ, in which he was thought to travel over the
expanse of heaven, changing to the Sekti boat as Tum in the latter part of
his journey. The word is written [glyphs] MÂÂD. ^{22}

MAHUTEAN OBELISK, or the Pantheon Obelisk. It was erected by Ramses II. in
Heliopolis. Clement XI. re-erected it in front of the Pantheon in Rome in
1711. A single column of hieroglyphs is inscribed on each of its faces.
^{10}

MÂKARÂ. The royal name of queen Hatasu, which see. ^{6 35}

MÂ-MEN-RÂ. The royal name of Seti I., which see. ^{87}

MAQDÂM-IBN-EL·`AMR-BEN-ABI-RE`ÂL. A mythical person. ^{80}

MARS. The Roman god of war, the Arês of the Greeks, and the Menthu (which
see) of the Egyptians. ^{61}

MAREOTIS. The large lake south of Alexandria, called by the ancient
Egyptians [glyphs] MERÎ·T, "_the lake_". ^{91}

MATARÎYEH. The modern name of Heliopolis, a short distance from Cairo. ^{1
5 36 91}

MEDÎNET-HABU. The modern name of a part of the necropolis of ancient
Thebes, and the site of many ruins, especially those of the temples of
Thothmes II. and Ramses III. ^{88}

MEDITERRANEAN SEA. This was well known to the ancient Egyptians and
traversed by the fleets of many Pharaohs, who, at one time, even subjugated
the islands in it. Its name in Egyptian is [glyphs] ÛAZ-ÛR, "_the great
sea_". ^{90}

MEGIDDO. A town of the Kharu [Syrians] in Palestine, on the border of the
great plain of Esdraëlon, the scene of the battles between Thothmes III.
and the Syrians, and between Neco and the Jewish king Josiah. The {132}town
was also taken by Sheshonq I. in his war against Rehoboam, king of Judah.
Its name in Egyptian is [glyphs] MÂKETHA. ^{36}

MEMNONIUM. Or Rameseum. The incorrect name given by the Greeks to the
temple of Ramses II. in Shekh-abd-el-Qurnah, in the necropolis of ancient
Thebes. It is called by the Greek geographer Diodorus the "tomb of
Osymandyas". There is one colossal statue of Ramses II. still in its ruins.
^{16 88}

MEMPHIS. The Greek form of the Egyptian [glyphs] MEN-NEFER·T, "_the good
place of rest_", the biblical [Hebrew: MOF] [môf] or [Hebrew: NOF] [nôf].
It was the capital of the first nome of Lower Egypt, and its present site
is the village Mîtrahîneh. The whole district was a large necropolis with
the famous pyramids from Gizeh to Saccarah. It is the "white wall" of the
Greek historian Herodotus, or the Egyptian [glyphs] ANBU-HEZ·T, "_the white
wall_". Its chief deity was Ptah. ^{4 10 19 65 90 91}

MENDES. The capital of the XVIth nome of Lower Egypt. 92

MENES. According to tradition the first Egyptian king, the founder of the
Egyptian empire, and the builder of Memphis. In Egyptian his name is
written [glyphs] [glyphs] or [glyphs] (as on the necklace in the possession
of the New York Historical Society) SUTEN-KAUT? MENA, "_the King of Upper
and Lower Egypt, Menes_". ^{89}

MEN-KHEPER-RÂ. The royal name of Thothmes III. ^{36 47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55
56 58 59 60}

MENTHU. The Egyptian god of war, identified by the Romans with their Mars.
He is usually represented with the head of a hawk surmounted by the disk of
the sun and two feathers ([glyphs]). He was only a form {133}of Amen-Râ,
and was worshiped in the district round about Thebes. His name in Egyptian
is [glyphs] MENTHU. ^{87}

MENZALEH LAKE. A large and shallow tract of water in the north-east corner
of Egypt, extending from Damietta to the Suez Canal. ^{92}

MER-AB. A son of Khufu of the fourth dynasty. The architect and builder of
the Great Pyramid. ^{5}

MERÌ·T. The Egyptian name of the Mareotis Lake. ^{91}

MER-TUM·T. The Egyptian name of the modern Meydoom, which see. ^{90}

MESOPOTAMIA. "_The land between the rivers_ (_Euphrates and Tigris_)." The
eastern part of ancient Syria [Assyria], called in the Bible Padan-aram or
Aram-nahara-yim (Gen. xxiv:10), which means "_Aram of the two rivers_",
whence the Egyptian designation [glyphs] NAHAR. The country was frequently
invaded and subjugated by the Egyptian kings, notably by Thothmes III.,
Amenôphis II., and Seti I. ^{36}

MESPHRES. Pliny's name for Thothmes III. It is in reality, however, the
name of his great sister, queen Hatasu, which see. ^{36}

MEYDOOM. Or Meydoon [Mêdûn]. The modern name of the Egyptian [glyphs]
MER-TUM·T, "_the favorite city of_ the god _Tum_", situated in the XXIst
nome of Upper Egypt, and famous for its quaintly terraced pyramid, ascribed
by Dümichen to king Snefru of the fourth dynasty. ^{90}

MÎTRAHÎNEH. The present site of ancient Memphis. ^{91}

MIZRAYIM. The Hebrew name of Egypt, really "the two Egypts". The Arabic is
[Arabic: MSR] [misr]. ^{84}

MNEVIS-BULL. The sacred bull of Heliopolis, the incarnation of Râ. (^{98})

{134}MOERIS LAKE. The so-called lake, or rather reservoir, in the Fayoom,
constructed by Amenemhât III. to receive the excess of the waters of the
inundation, and keep the water for the times of drought. ^{90}

MONOLITH. A monument made of _one_ stone only. ^{7 18}

MONTE CAVALLO OBELISK. This is at present in front of the Quirinal in Rome,
and is the companion of the St^a. Maria Maggiore Obelisk. As it is
uninscribed, it is impossible to tell by whom or when it was erected.
Perhaps the emperor Claudius [41-54 A. D.] had it removed to Rome. It was
re-erected by Pius VI. in 1789. ^{9}

MONTE CITORIO OBELISK, or the Campensis Obelisk, which see. ^{22 25}

MONTE PINCIO OBELISK, or the Barberini Obelisk, which see. ^{22}

MOSES. The Jewish law-giver, who studied at the university in Heliopolis,
was brought up at the court of the Pharaohs, and afterwards led the
Israelites out of Egypt. He lived in the time of Ramses II., and departed
with his people under Menephthah I. His name has not yet been found on the
Egyptian monuments or in the papyri. ^{2}

MUMMIES. The bodies of the Egyptian dead which were preserved in a mixture
of salt, bitumen, cedar oil, &c. The bodies were prepared for embalming by
the _parakhistæ_ or _tarakheutæ_, who disemboweled them, wound linen
bandages around them, placed with them chapters from the Book of the Dead
(which see), and then deposited them in a sarcophagus of stone or wood,
according to the means of the deceased. The purpose of this embalming was
that the soul, on its return to the earth, would again find its body and
reanimate it. Everything was, therefore, done by the ancient {135}Egyptians
to protect their mummies against decomposition and robbers, some of the
Pharaohs even building the monster-pyramids for their reception. ^{8 33 34}

MYCERINUS. The Greek form of the Egyptian MEN-KAU-RÂ, a king of the fourth
dynasty and the builder of the third Great Pyramid. His sarcophagus and a
part of his mummy are in the British Museum. His name is written [glyphs]
SUTEN-KAUT? MEN-KAU-RÂ, "_The king of Upper and Lower Egypt, The Sun,
mighty in his works_". ^{91}

NAHASB OBELISK. A small and prostrate obelisk about 70 miles south-east of
Suez, in the Sinaitic Peninsula. It was discovered by a German traveler in
1817, but nothing further is known of it. The place where it is standing is
also called Wâdi Nasb. ^{11}

NAPLES OBELISK. It is also called the Borgian Obelisk, having been for a
time in the Borgian Museum at Velletri, and was discovered at Prænesté,
Italy, in 1791, broken in four pieces. The inscription on it coincides with
that of the Albani Obelisk (which see). It is now in the Museo Nazionale at
Naples. ^{10}

NECROPOLIS. A Greek word meaning "_the city of the dead_", our "cemetery".
In Egypt the necropolis was generally a collection of rock-hewn tombs, but
always situated to the west of a city toward the setting sun, this being
the first station on the road to the Lower World. It is expressed in
Egyptian by the sign [glyphs] AA. ^{2 4 5}

NECTANEBO I. The Greek name of a king of the XXXth dynasty, who forced the
Persian king Artaxerxes II. to relinquish his hold on Egypt and reigned for
eighteen years. His Egyptian name is ^{9}

   suten-kaut?       Senezem-ab-sotep-en-Amen-Râ         sa Râ        {136}

  The king of Upper     "Benevolent, chosen             the Sun's
  and Lower Egypt,          of Amen-Râ",                offspring,

  Amen-mer-nekht-Her-heb·t

  "Beloved of Amen, Nekht-Her-Heb."

NEGATIVE CONFESSION. A passage in the 125th chapter of the Book of the
Dead, where the deceased gives an account of his life and begs to be
admitted into paradise. To that end he states that he has not committed the
forty-two great sins. (^{98})

NEITH. The Egyptian goddess of the lower heavens, the sister of Isis and
Nephthys. She is generally represented holding a bow and arrows in her
hand. The Greeks identified her with their Athêné (Minerva). In Egyptian
her name is [glyphs] NET. ^{92}

NEKHEB. The goddess of Eileithyia and identified by the ancients with their
Lucina, the goddess of childbirth. Little is known of her. The Egyptian
form of her name is [glyphs] NEKHEB·T. ^{87}

NEKHEB·T. The Egyptian name of Eileithyiapolis, which see. ^{87}

NERO. The fifth Roman emperor [54-68 A. D.]. His full name is Nero Claudius
Cæsar Drusus Germanicus. On the Egyptian monuments he is called ^{11}

  hez-desher     heq-hequ-sotep-en-Ptah-mer-As·t   sa Râ         Autugreder
    neb taui                                       neb khâu      Narani

  The possessor of         "The prince of         the Sun's
  the red and white        princes, chosen        offspring,    "Autocrator
  crowns, lord of the     of Ptah, beloved        lord of        Nero."
  two countries,              of Isis",           diadems.

NEW YORK OBELISK. It is usually, but incorrectly, called "Cleopatra's
Needle". ^{20 23 25 49 72 73 81 91}

{137}NILE. The ancient Egyptians venerated it as a special deity, giving
him the epithet [glyphs] S·ÂNKH, "_he who produces life_". He was generally
represented thus [glyphs], and his name was [glyphs] HÂP. ^{2 4 16 27 84 86
88 90 92}

NILOMETER. This was erected by the Pharaohs on the island of Elephantine,
to enable them to measure the height of the inundation. It was restored in
1870 by the Khedive Ishmaël. Another Nilometer is at present on the island
of Rhôda at Cairo. The Egyptian sign of the Nilometer is [glyphs] DED,
which means "_stability_". ^{86}

NINEVEH. The capital of the Assyrian empire. It was taken by several
Pharaohs in their Asiatic campaigns, especially by Thothmes III., Amenôphis
II., and Seti I. ^{36}

NOME. The Greek word for "province". There were 22 nomes in Upper and 20
nomes in Lower Egypt. The Egyptian word is [glyphs] HESP, "_the province_".
^{84 90}

NUBIA. It is also called Ethiopia, and was incorporated into the Egyptian
empire at the time of the XVIIIth dynasty. Its capital was Napata, now
Jebel Barkal, which even became the capital of the whole empire during the
XXVIth dynasty. The Egyptian name of Nubia is [glyphs] Kush, the biblical
[Hebrew: KWSH] [kûsh]. ^{86}

NUBÎ·T. The Egyptian name of Ombos, at present Kôm-Omboo (which see). ^{86}

OASIS. There were seven oases in the Libyan desert, to the west of Egypt.
The Egyptian word is [glyphs] UT, "_the oasis_". ^{89}

OMBOS. The modern Kôm-Omboo, which see. ^{29 86}

ORONTES. The principal river of Syria, called in Egyptian [glyphs] ARUNUTH.
^{36}

{138}OSARKON I. A king of the XXIId dynasty, whose name in Egyptian is ^{38
71 72}

   suten-kaut?   Kherp-kheper-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   sa Râ     Amen-mer-Ûsarken

  The king of Upper     "Made governor by     the Sun's  "Beloved of Amen,
  and Lower Egypt,       Ra, chosen of Ra",   offspring,    Osarkon."

OSIRIS. One of the oldest of the Egyptian gods and the judge of the dead in
the Lower World. His worship was universal throughout Egypt at all times.
His Egyptian name is [glyphs] USAR. The great Osiris-myth is this. Osiris
was, at one time, a king, and reigned over Egypt. Going on travels he left
Isis, his sister and wife, to conduct the government. The devil, Set, then
revolted against him, killed him, cut his body into fourteen pieces, and
scattered them over the country. Isis collected them, erecting a temple
where a piece of his body was found, and called on her son Horus to avenge
his father. Horus met Set in combat at Edfu. In this encounter Set was
"transfixed". The inscriptions in the temple of Edfu give a glowing
description of this battle. Osiris is generally represented with his whole
body shrouded in a covering and his head surmounted by the atef-crown;
thus, [glyphs]. He has a peculiar beard curving outward at the end. He was
considered to be the author of all animal and vegetable life, and the god
of agriculture. All those that died were called by his name, "the Osirian",
that is, "amenable to Osiris in his judgment-hall". ^{61 87 88 92}

PALESTINE. Many Pharaohs, especially Thothmes III., subjugated this country
in their Asiatic conquests. The names of most of its cities and provinces
occur on the Egyptian monuments. One of its Egyptian names is [glyphs]
KANÂNA, "_Canaan_". ^{36}

{139}PAMPHILIAN OBELISK, or the Obelisk of the PIAZZA NAVONA in Rome. This
is a pseudo-Egyptian obelisk, cut by the Romans in the quarry of Syene. It
was erected by the emperor Domitian, and re-erected by Innocent X.
(Pamphili) in 1651 in its present position. There is a single column of
poorly executed hieroglyphs on each face of it. ^{9}

PANOPOLIS. The Greek name of the capital of the IXth nome of Upper Egypt,
called in Egyptian [glyphs] PER-KHEM·T, "_the city of the temple of (the
god) Khem_". It was the seat of the worship of Khem, whom the Greeks
identified with their Pan. ^{89}

PANTHEON OBELISK. The same as the Mahutean Obelisk, which see.

PAPYRUS. The Egyptian paper, made of thin slices of the papyrus plant,
called in Egyptian [glyphs] THUFI. On it were written works on almost all
subjects. The finest papyri are at present in the British Museum and the
Museum of Bulak. ^{34}

PASHT. The Greek name of the Egyptian goddess Sekhet, which see. ^{92}

PELUSIUM. The classical name of a city near the site of the ancient
Egyptian Avaris, which see. ^{92}

PENTAÛR. The Egyptian Homer, who described the exploits of Ramses II. in
his war with the Hittites. His name is written [glyphs] PEN-TA-ÛR. ^{37}

PER-BA-NEB-DED·T. The Egyptian name of Mendes, which see. ^{92}

PER-BAS·T. The Egyptian name of Bubastis, which see. ^{92}

PER-KHEM·T. The Egyptian name of Panopolis, which see. ^{89}

PER-USAR·T. The Egyptian name of Busiris, which see. ^{92}

{140}PHARAOH. The Hebrew form of the Egyptian [glyphs] PER-Â, "_the great
house_", or more correctly, as the Hieratic generally has it, [glyphs]
PER-Â, "_he of the great double house_". This was the official title of the
Egyptian kings. ^{1 2 5 6 7 16 19 20 22 25 29 37 38 46 48 53 57 58 60 61 63
64 65 66 67 68 69 70 79 84 87 89}

"PHARAOH OF THE OPPRESSION." All Egyptologists are agreed that this was
Ramses II. ^{37 63}

"PHARAOH'S NEEDLE." The Arabic rendering for "obelisk". ^{79}

PHILAE. An island in the Nile near the Nubian boundary, belonging to the
first nome of Upper Egypt. ^{4 7 9 10 22 84 86}

PHILAE OBELISK. A fragment of an obelisk which was erected, together with
its companion, the Corfe Castle Obelisk (which see), in front of the temple
of Isis by Ptolemy IX. Euergetes II. and his sister Cleopatra II. It has
one column of hieroglyphs on each face, and is at Philæ. ^{9}

PIÂNKHÎ. An Ethiopian king, of the XXIVth dynasty, who conquered Egypt at
the close of the XXIId dynasty, when it was divided into thirteen petty
kingdoms. His name in Egyptian is ^{21}

    suten-kaut?      Men-kheper-Râ      sa Râ      P-ânkhî

  The king of Upper  "The stable and   the Sun's   "He who
   and Lower Egypt,   creative Sun",   offspring,    lives."

PIAZZA DELLA MINERVA OBELISK. A small obelisk in Rome. It has only a single
column of hieroglyphs on each face, and was probably erected by Psametik
II. in Saïs. It was removed by the Romans and re-erected by Pope Alexander
VII. in 1667, who had it placed on a marble elephant. ^{10}

{141}PIAZZA DEL POPOLO OBELISK. Another name of the Flaminian Obelisk,
which see.

PIAZZA NAVONA OBELISK. Another name for the Pamphilian Obelisk, which see.
^{22}

PLINY, surnamed "the Elder". A famous Roman naturalist and author (23-79 A.
D.). ^{36}

"POMPEY'S PILLAR." The only important monument of antiquity at present in
Alexandria. It is a shaft of granite from the quarry of Syene rising, with
the pedestal, to the height of 104 ft., and erected by the Roman prefect
Pompeius in honor of the emperor Diocletian. ^{91}

PONTIUS. The architect who transported the two obelisks of Heliopolis to
Alexandria in 12 B. C. He may have possibly also removed the Flaminian and
Campensis Obelisks (which see) to Rome for the emperor Augustus in 20 B. C.
^{39 73 74 82}

PORTA DEL POPOLO OBELISK. Another name of the Esmeade Obelisk, which see.
^{11}

PRIOLI OBELISK. A small obelisk in the gardens of the Sultan in
Constantinople. Nothing is known of it, as its inscriptions have never been
published. ^{9}

PSAMETIK II. A king of the XXVIth dynasty, the son of Psametik I. He
conquered Ethiopia and reigned for six years. His son Hophra is mentioned
in the Bible. His name in Egyptian is ^{7 9 10 22}

    suten-kaut?          Nefer-ab-Râ       sa Râ        Psemthek

  The king of Upper   "the kind-hearted   the Sun's    "Psametik."
  and Lower Egypt,           Sun",        offspring,

PSEUDO-EGYPTIAN, that is, having the appearance of being Egyptian, but not
so in reality. A number of the extant obelisks belong in this category.
^{4}

{142}PTHAH [pronounced tá]. The chief deity of Lower Egypt, an emanation of
Râ. He is generally represented as a deformed child holding two serpents
and stepping on two crocodiles. In Upper Egypt he was worshipped under the
form of an upright mummy ([glyphs]). His name in Egyptian is [glyphs] PTAH.
^{65 69 90}

PTAH-SOKAR-OSIRIS. A form of Ptah, peculiar to Memphis, and represented as
a deformed child. His Egyptian name is [glyphs] PTAH-SEKER-USAR. ^{29}

PTAH-TATHUNEN. A title of Ptah of Memphis. The Egyptian form of the word is
[glyphs] PTAH-TATHUNEN, meaning perhaps "_Ptah of the stable earth_". ^{65}

PTOLEMIES. The descendants of Ptolemy Sôtêr, a general of Alexander the
Great, and forming the XXXIIId dynasty of Egyptian kings. Each of them
married his sister. Their reign extended from 305 to 30 B. C., and was
characterized by infamy, tyranny, murder, and poisoning. ^{9 21 22}

PTOLEMY IX. EUERGETES II. A weak king of the XXXIIId dynasty, married to
and reigning for a time with his sister Cleopatra II. and his niece
Cleopatra III. His name in Egyptian is ^{7 10}

    suten-kaut?    Nuter-per-ââ-en-Ptah-sotep-en-âr-maâ-Amen-Râ-sekhem-ânkh
  The king of     "The Epiphanes, the heir of Ptah, the chosen of Amen-Ra,
  Upper and          dispenser of justice, conqueror, living",
  Lower Egypt,

   sa Râ            Ptûlmîs-ânkh-zeta-Ptah-mer
  the Sun's   "Ptolemy, living forever, beloved of Ptah."
  offspring,

PUNT. The Egyptian name of the southern part of Arabia, which see.

{143}PYLON. The large mass of masonry of an Egyptian temple, resembling two
truncated pyramids with the gate between them. A picture of one is given on
page 20. Its hieroglyph is perhaps [glyphs]. ^{20 24}

PYRAMIDION. The apex of an obelisk which resembles a miniature pyramid. It
was sometimes inscribed with pictures and hieroglyphs, and covered with a
capping of gold-metal or electrum (which see). ^{18 19 21 22 26 47 50 51 52
53 54 55}

PYRAMIDS. The enormous masses of stone built by various kings, especially
those of the fourth dynasty, and serving as their tombs. There are quite a
number of them in and near ancient Memphis, the largest being that of
Khufu, called the Great Pyramid, which is 480 ft. high. The usual Egyptian
word for "pyramid" is [glyphs] ABMER. ^{12 27 91}

QEBTI·T. The Egyptian name of Coptos, which see. ^{88}

QEM·T. The common Egyptian designation of Egypt, which see. ^{61 66 70 84}

QURNAH. A modern village marking the site of a part of the necropolis of
ancient Thebes, situated on the west shore of the Nile. Here are the ruins
of the grand temple begun by Seti I., and completed by Ramses II. ^{88}

RÂ. The Sun, the Supreme Being, and the organizer of the world according to
Egyptian mythology. He was worshipped in the entire country, but especially
in Heliopolis. He is always represented with the face of a hawk. With the
fifth dynasty the Pharaohs began to call themselves the incarnation of Râ,
or [glyphs] SA RÂ, "_the son of the Sun_", which title they retained until
the time of the Roman emperors. The Egyptian name of the sun is [glyphs]
RÂ. ^{21 22 27 30 31 36 37 38 39 46 47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60
61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 82 91}

{144}RÂ-HOR-KHUTI. A name of the sun-god, written in Egyptian [glyphs] or
[glyphs] RÂ-HOR-KHUTI, "_the Sun, the hawk of the two horizons_". ^{28 29
30 46 47 49 55 58 59 60}

RAMSES II. One of the greatest monarchs the world ever saw, the son of Seti
I., and a king of the XIXth dynasty. He conquered most of the then known
world, built magnificent temples, erected obelisks, and perpetuated his
name on almost every Egyptian monument. His Egyptian name is ^{7 8 9 10 16
36 37 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 88 91}

  suten-kaut?   User-Mâ-Râ-sotep-en-Râ   sa Râ     Amen-mer-Râ-meses-su

  The king of   "Strong in truth,      the Sun's  "Beloved of Amen, the
  Upper and      the Sun, chosen       offspring,  Sun, begetting himself."
  Lower Egypt,   of the Sun",

RAMSES III. A famous king of the XXth dynasty, who conquered the Hittites,
Syrians, and the tribes of Palestine. His name in Egyptian is ^{112 131}

    suten-kaut?       User-mâ-Râ-Amen-mer       sa Râ      Râ-meses-heq-An

  The king of Upper  "Strong in truth, the    the Sun's,  "The Sun's child,
  and Lower Egypt,    Sun, beloved of Amen",  offspring,     prince of
                                                             Heliopolis."

RÂQEDÎ·T. The Egyptian name of Alexandria (which see), called Rhakôtis by
the ancients. ^{91}

REDESIEH. A modern village in what was formerly the first nome of Upper
Egypt. ^{68}

RED SEA. This was called in Egyptian [glyphs] MUQED·T. ^{86 88}

RHAKOTIS. The Greek name of the town on whose site Alexander the Great
built Alexandria (which see). ^{91}

RISING SUN. The god Râ. ^{22}

ROME. The capital of the ancient world. Its Egyptian name occurs on the
Barberini Obelisk as [glyphs] HARMÂ·T. ^{5 7 9 20 22 23 25}

{145}ROSETTA. A modern town at the mouth of the Bolbitinic arm of the Nile.
It was the ancient Bolbitiné. ^{91}

ROSETTA STONE. Without a doubt this is the most important monument of
antiquity that has come down to us. It is a stelé of black basalt, bearing
an inscription in Hieroglyphic, Demotic, and Greek. It contains a decree of
the priests in honor of Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, which was issued on March 27,
195 B. C. This stone, discovered in 1799, furnished the key for deciphering
the hieroglyphs, and is now preserved in the British Museum. ^{92}

ROTENNU. A Syrian people who were repeatedly defeated and subjugated by
kings of the XVIIIth and later dynasties. They were subdivided into the
Upper and Lower Rotennu, and their Egyptian name was [glyphs] RETHENNU.
^{36}

SACCARAH. A modern village near the site of ancient Memphis with a number
of famous pyramids. The name is undoubtedly derived from that of the god
Ptah-_Sokar_-Osiris. ^{91}

SA-EL-HAJAR. The modern name of Saïs. ^{92}

SAÏS. The capital of the fifth nome of Lower Egypt, the Egyptian [glyphs]
SA·T, and the Coptic [Coptic: sai] [saï]. Nothing now remains but a mass of
débris. ^{4 10 92}

SAÎU·T. The Egyptian name of Sioot, which see. ^{89}

SALLUSTIAN OBELISK. An obelisk in Rome standing opposite the church of
Santa Trinita dei Monti. It is a poor Roman copy of the Piazza del Popolo
Obelisk, and has three columns of hieroglyphs on it, together with the
cartouches of Seti I. and Ramses II. It was re-erected by Pius VI. in 1789.
^{9}

SÂN. The modern name of Tanis, which see. ^{11}

{146}SÂN OBELISKS. As many as thirteen fragments of perhaps four obelisks
are still at Tanis (Sân). These obelisks appear to have been erected by
Ramses II. ^{11}

SARBUT-EL-KHEDEM OBELISK. An erect obelisk in the Sinaitic Peninsula, on
the way from Suez to Mount Sinai. The hieroglyphs on it are partially
obliterated. ^{9}

SA·T. The Egyptian name of Saïs, which see. ^{92}

SEBEK. The crocodile-headed deity and a form of Râ. He was specially
worshiped in the Fayoom, and his Egyptian name was [glyphs] SEBEK. ^{90}

SEBEK-RÂ. A combination of the gods Sebek and Râ, the local deity of Ombos.
^{29}

SEKHET. A lion-headed goddess and the wife of Ptah. As a destroying deity
her name is [glyphs] SEKHET, but as a goddess of love it was [glyphs] BAST,
or, as the Greeks called her, Pasht. She was usually identified with Diana.
(^{92 98 103})

SEKTET BOAT. The boat of the evening-sun Tum, in which he was thought to
pass over the heavens. In Egyptian the word is written [glyphs] SEKTET.
^{22}

SENI·T. The Egyptian name of Esneh, which see. ^{87}

SET or SUTEKH. The national god of the Hyksos or the Shepherd kings of
Asia, whose worship was forced on the Egyptians. He was the personification
of evil, and was represented as an ass-headed deity with the usual divine
insignia. He was the sworn enemy of Horus, whose father (Osiris) he had
slain, and is identified with the devil. His picture, [glyphs], was
afterwards completely erased by the Egyptians from their monuments. His
Egyptian name is [glyphs] SET or [glyphs] SUTEKH. ^{87}

{147}SETI I. A famous king of the XIXth dynasty and the father of Ramses
II. He was an intense worshipper of Set, the devil, and forced his
adoration on the people. His many wars carried him into Arabia Felix,
Palestine, the Hittite territory, and beyond the Orontes and Euphrates. Out
of him and his two successors the ancients fabricated the name Sesostris.
His Egyptian name is ^{6 9 86 87 88}

     suten-kaut?       Mâ-men-Râ      sa Râ      Setî-mer-en-Ptah

  The king of Upper  "Truth, the    the Sun's   "Seti, the beloved
   and Lower Egypt,   stable Sun",  offspring,      of Ptah."

SETTING SUN. The god Tum, which see. ^{22}

SHEPHERD KINGS. See under Hyksos. ^{92}

SILSILIS. The Egyptian Khennu, which see. ^{86}

SINAITIC PENINSULA. That part of western Asia lying between Syria and
Egypt, and playing an important part in the forty years' sojourn there of
the Israelites under Moses. ^{1 4 9 11}

SION HOUSE OBELISK. Perhaps the same as the Alnwick Castle Obelisk, which
see.--Sion House is the country-seat of the Duke of Northumberland. ^{10}

SIOOT. The modern name of the capital of the XIIIth nome of Upper Egypt,
called in Egyptian [glyphs] SAÌU·T. Its local deity was the jackal-headed
god Anubis. ^{89}

SOUGHTON HALL OBELISK. An obelisk mentioned by Bonomi, which may be
identical with one of those at present in England. ^{11}

SPHINX. There are three kinds of sphinxes: Androsphinxes, having the head
of a man; Criosphinxes, having that of a ram; and Hieracosphinxes, having
that of a {148}hawk. A few are also found with the form of a woman. "The
Sphinx" is the monster figure in front of the Pyramid of Khufu, but older
than it. It was cut out of a solid mountain, and had between its paws a
temple of Harmachis, to whom it was dedicated. The sphinx represents the
incarnation of the divine wisdom of the Pharaoh ^{32 46 47 49 50 51 52 53
54 55}

STELE. A slab rounded off on top and covered with inscriptions. It was made
either of wood or of stone. The word comes from the Greek [Greek: stêlê]
[stêlê]. The Egyptian word for it is [glyphs] UTU. ^{5 31 37 48}

ST. EPHRAIM SYRUS. A Christian writer of the Syrian church, who died 373 A.
D. ^{19}

ST^{A.} MARIA MAGGIORE OBELISK. The companion of the Monte Cavallo Obelisk,
at present in front of the basilica (church) of Santa Maria Maggiore in
Rome. It has no inscriptions, and was removed to Rome by the emperor
Claudius. Sixtus V. re-erected it on its present site in 1587. ^{9}

STUART, Villiers. A traveler and author. ^{2}

"SUBLIME PORTE." The name of the place where the Sultan administers
justice, and, with us, a designation for the Sultan himself. The Turkish
term for it is [Arabic: BAB `ALY] [bâbi 'âlî], "_the high gate_". ^{53}

SUEZ CANAL. The first attempt to construct it was made by Seti I., of the
XIXth dynasty. It then only connected the Nile with the Red Sea, and was
finished by Ramses II. Traces of it still remain. The present Canal was
planned and completed by Lesseps in 1869. ^{40}

SUN·T. The Egyptian name of Syêné. ^{86}

SYÊNÉ. The Greek name of the modern Assuân, which was in the first nome of
Upper Egypt, and called [glyphs] {149}SUN·T by the Egyptians. The famous
quarries, from which most of the obelisks were taken, were located here.
The biblical name is [Hebrew: SWEINEIH] [s'vênêh, cf. Ezekiel xxix:10,
xxx:6], which is the same as the Coptic [Coptic: souan] [sûan], and the
Arabic [Arabic: ASWAN] [aswân]. ^{5 13 16 23 24 35 82 86}

SYENITE. The reddish amphibole-granite of Syêné, which was taken for all
the Egyptian obelisks. ^{23}

SYRIA. A large tract of country in western Asia, bordering on Egypt. It was
inhabited by many different tribes, with whom the Pharaohs of the XVIIIth
and XIXth dynasties carried on extensive wars. ^{36}

TA-EN-TA-RER·T. The Egyptian name of Denderah, which see. ^{88}

TANIS. The Greek name of the Egyptian [glyphs] ZÂN·T the capital of the
XIVth nome of Lower Egypt, now Sân. It was the main seat of the Hyksos, who
embellished it in every possible way. ^{4 11 45 92}

TATHUNEN. See under Ptah-tathunen. ^{65}

TEL-BASTA. The modern name of Bubastis, which see. ^{92}

TEL-EL-AMARNA. The present site of a city founded by the heretic king
Amenôphis IV. in honor of the sun-disk Aten, in the XVth nome of Upper
Egypt. It was totally destroyed after his death. ^{29 89}

THEBES. The largest and most famous city of the ancient world, the capital
of the fourth nome of Upper Egypt and of the whole empire. Its usual
Egyptian name was [glyphs] US·T, or [glyphs] NU·T AMEN, which was sometimes
shortened into [glyphs] NU·T Â·T, "_the great city_", or [glyphs] NU·T,
"_the City_" simply, the biblical [Hebrew: N'] [nô]. Its site is now
occupied by several villages, such as Karnak, {150}Luxor, &c. The local
deity was Amen. ^{2 3 4 9 10 11 16 28 29 48 50 53 55 56 57 59 60 87 88 89}

THENI·T. The Egyptian name of Thinis. ^{89}

THINIS or THIS. The capital of the eighth nome of Upper Egypt, the reputed
home of the first king of Egypt, Menes. Its Egyptian name is [glyphs]
THENI·T, at present El-Tineh, which see. ^{89}

THOTH [pronounced tót]. The Egyptian god of writing, learning, and
medicine. He was thought to introduce the soul of the deceased into the
Lower World and to read off its sins before the judgment-seat of Osiris. He
was afterwards identified with the moon. His sacred animal was the
cynocephalus-ape ([glyphs] or [glyphs]), and he himself is represented with
the head of the ibis, [glyphs]. His name in Egyptian is [glyphs] or
[glyphs] DEHUTI. ^{49 56 57}

THOTHMES I. [tótmees]. A king of the XVIIIth dynasty and the son of Aahmes
I. He was a mighty warrior, and his conquests were very extensive. His name
in Egyptian is ^{5 9 10}

    suten-kaut?      Râ-â-kheper-ka       sa Râ      Râ-Dehuti-khâ-ma-meses

  The king of Upper   "The great Sun,    the Sun's  "Glorious like the Sun,
   and Lower Egypt,   producing works",  offspring,     child of Thoth."

THOTHMES II. [tótmees]. A king of the XVIIIth dynasty and a son of Thothmes
I. He was a weak monarch and altogether under the influence of his great
sister Hatasu. His name in Egyptian is ^{6}

     suten-kaut?      Â-kheper-en-Râ    sa Râ       Dehuti-mes-nefer-khâu

  The king of Upper  "Formed by the   the Sun's    "The child of Thoth,
   and Lower Egypt,     great Sun",   offspring,    beautiful in his
                                                    appearances."

THOTHMES III. [tótmees]. The greatest king of the {151}XVIIIth dynasty, a
son of Thothmes I. His empire extended over all the then known world. The
New York Obelisk was erected by him. His name in Egyptian is ^{6 7 9 10 19
31 35 36 37 38 46 47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 82}

     suten-kaut?      Men-kheper-Râ    sa Râ     Dehuti-meses-nefer-kheperu

  The king of Upper  "The stable and   the Sun's    "The child of Thoth,
   and Lower Egypt,    creative Sun",  offspring,    of beautiful form."

THOTHMES IV. [tótmees]. A king of the XVIIIth dynasty, the successor of
Amenôphis II. He reigned for nine years only, and his Egyptian name is ^{6
9 19}

     suten-kaut?      Men-kheperu-Râ      sa Râ      Dehuti-meses-khâ-khâu
  The king of Upper   "The Sun, stable   the Sun's   "The child of Thoth,
   and Lower Egypt,    in his forms",    offspring,   glorious in his
                                                      diadems."

TROJA. The name which the Greeks gave to the town near Memphis, the
[glyphs] RU-ÂU·T (with the feminine article TA-RU-ÂU·T) of the Egyptians.
Here was situated the quarry of Memphis. The similarity of the words gave
rise to the name "Troja" (Troy), which must not, however, be confounded
with the famous Greek city of the same name in Asia Minor. ^{91}

TUM. The Egyptian god of the setting sun. He was especially worshiped in
Heliopolis. In painted inscriptions his color is generally red, like that
of Râ, sometimes, however, also green. His name in Egyptian is [glyphs]
TUM. ^{22 27 28 29 46 51 53 56 57 58 67}

TURA. The quarry of Memphis from which the "white stone" was taken. The
Greeks called it Troja, which see. ^{91}

"TWO COUNTRIES." A designation of Egypt, which was divided into two parts,
Upper and Lower Egypt. It {152}may, however, also signify "heaven and
earth" or "the universe". It is in Egyptian [glyphs] TAUI, "_the two
countries_". (^{39 39}) ^{47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 62 63 64 65 66 67 68
69 70}

UPPER EGYPT. The southern part of Egypt from the Fayoom to Assuân. ^{2 3 31
84 89}

UPPER AND LOWER EGYPT. The two divisions of Egypt, which were at certain
periods of Egyptian history separate kingdoms. Some of the Egyptian
designations are [glyphs] HEZ-DESHER, "_the land of the white and red
crowns_" (cf. page 31), [glyphs] QEBEHUI, "_the land of the two sources_
(of the Nile)" (cf. page 119), [glyphs] RES-MEH, "_the south and north
land_", [glyphs] QEMÂ-MEH, "_the south and north land_", [glyphs] ?-ÛZ,
"_the land of the lotus and the papyrus_", &c. The usual title of the king
was [glyphs] SUTEN-KAUT?, "_the king of Upper and Lower Egypt_". ^{30 48 52
53 54 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 72 84}

URAEUS SNAKE. The _Cobra haje_ of Egypt, the most deadly reptile in that
country, whose figure was worn as the head-dress of kings and queens. It
typifies Pharaoh's power over the life and death of his subjects, and its
Egyptian name is [glyphs] ÂRÂ·T. The Greeks called it "basilisk", from
which they took their word for "king", [Greek: basileus] [basileus]. ^{56
57}

USER-MÂ-RÂ-SOTEP-EN-RÂ. The royal name of Ramses II., which see ^{37 62 63
64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71}

USERTESEN I. The second king of the XIIth dynasty, the son of Amenémhâ I.,
and the conqueror of the Ethiopians. His name in Egyptian is ^{5 9 11 36
91}

    suten-kaut?        Râ-kheper-ka         sa Râ       Usertesen

  The king of Upper  "The Sun, producing   the Sun's   "Usertesen."
   and Lower Egypt,        works",         offspring,

{153}US SCEPTRE. The symbol of power carried in the hands of kings and
gods, written [glyphs] US, or else [glyphs] US, which is the "_cucufa_",
also called the Zâm-sceptre. ^{46 87}

US·T. The Egyptian name of Thebes, which see. ^{48 50 53 55 56 59 87}

VATICAN OBELISK. An obelisk without an inscription on the Piazza di San
Pietro, in front of the Vatican, in Rome. Originally erected in Heliopolis,
it was transported to Rome by the emperor Caligula (about 40 A.D.). It was
the only one of all the obelisks not overthrown and broken during the times
of anarchy, pillage, and destruction in that city. Sixtus V. had it removed
and erected in its present position in 1586. ^{9}

VICTORY STELÉ. A stelé which was found in Karnak. It contains a martial
hymn of Thothmes III. ^{31 48}

VILLA MATTEI OBELISK. A small obelisk in the Villa Mattei or the Villa
Celimontana in Rome, presented by a certain Cyriacus Matthæius to the Roman
Senate. It was either erected by him in his gardens in 1582, or else by
Sixtus V. in 1590. The lower portion of it is modern, but the upper half
bears the cartouches of Ramses II. and Psametik II. ^{10}

"VOCAL MEMNON." One of the colossal statues of Amenôphis III. west of
Thebes in the desert. It was thrown down by an earthquake about 27 B. C.,
and cracked. On re-erection it was found to emit a musical sound at
sunrise. This gave rise to the Greek legend of Memnon and Aurora (the
dawn). Since its restoration the sound is no longer heard. The Arabs call
the two colossal statues Shamy and Damy. (^{96 112})

VULTURE DIADEM. A diadem of Pharaoh, in Egyptian [glyphs] NEB MUT or NEB
SHETA (doubtful!). The figure of the vulture was generally worn as the
head-dress of {154}the queens. It is the symbol of protection, and
represents Pharaoh and his queen as the protectors and nourishers of their
people. ^{56 57 66 70}

WANSTEAD OBELISK. A fragment of an obelisk which existed at the time of
Zoëga in Wanstead, a suburb of London. It was brought to England from
Alexandria in 1712. Its present location is unknown. ^{11}

WILKINSON, Sir John Gardner. An English Egyptologist (born in 1797, died in
1875). His famous work is _The Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians_. ^{14}

YA`MER-BEN-SHADDÂD. A mythical person. ^{80}

ZÂN·T. The Egyptian name of Tanis, which see. ^{92}

ZOËGA, George. A Danish archæologist interested in Egyptological subjects
(born in 1755, died in 1809 in Rome). ^{11}

[Illustration: Pharaoh in his royal robes offering libation to the gods.]




{155}A GLOSSARY

OF HIEROGLYPHS OCCURRING IN THIS BOOK, TOGETHER WITH THEIR PRONUNCIATION
AND DETERMINATIVE VALUE.

  We divide the Egyptian hieroglyphs, after the manner of Lepsius, into
  twenty-five classes. In the following list the hieroglyphs are given
  together with what they were _probably_ meant to represent. The more
  important pronunciations are added, which, however, can not be used
  indiscriminately, but are fixed by _complements_, that is, _letters_ of
  the alphabet _indicating_ the pronunciation and either prefixed or else
  suffixed to the hieroglyph. The pronunciation of the later, or Ptolemaic,
  times is marked *. _Determinatives_ are _silent_ hieroglyphs,
  determining, in words of the same pronunciation, into what category of
  objects or ideas these words belong.

  _Pron._ stands for pronunciation. * stands for _pronunciation of later
  times_. _Det._ stands for _determinative_. The _numerals_ refer to the
  pages of the book where the hieroglyph occurs.




I. FIGURES OF MEN.


[glyphs] "man with arms hanging down."

_Det._ of person, youth. 62


[glyphs] "man with arms raised."

_Pron._ qa, hââ.

_Det._ of height, joy, carrying, lifting. 61


[glyphs] "old man leaning on a staff."

_Pron._ aau, ten.

_Det._ of old age, weakness. 27


[glyphs] "man striking."

_Pron._ nekht.

_Det._ of violent action. 60


[glyphs] "man with crosier and whip."

_Pron._ *heq. 106 136 136 136 136


[glyphs] "child sucking its finger."

_Pron._ s, *n, *nen *shera, *khen, *â, *kh.,

_Det._ of child, youth, renewal. 27 27 48


[glyphs] "prisoner tied with ropes."

_Det._ of enemy, crime. 126


[glyphs] "man sitting."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular masculine personal pronoun).

_Det._ of man, person. 94 94 94 121


[glyphs] "man with finger in his mouth."

_Pron._ am.

_Det._ of speaking, eating, thinking. 137


[glyphs] "bearded man sitting."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular masculine personal pronoun). 31 48

_Det._ of man, king, god, goddess. 27 27 27 27 27 65 92 105 128 128 138 139
142 143 144 144 144 144 146 146 150 151


{156}[glyphs] "king with Zâm-sceptre."

_Det._ of king, god. 87 120


[glyphs] "king with whip."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular masculine personal pronoun).

_Det._ of king, god. 31 48


[glyphs] "king without the whip."

_Pron._ same as preceding.

_Det._ of king, god. 140 140


[glyphs] "king with white crown of Upper Egypt."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular masculine personal pronoun).

_Det._ of king, god. 66 69 70


[glyphs] "king with the double crown of Egypt and the Zâm-sceptre."

_Pron._ same as preceding.

_Det._ of king, god. 133


[glyphs] "man sitting on a throne with the whip in his hands."

_Pron._ shepes 62 122, as.

_Det._ of high personage, ancestor, god. 56




II. FIGURES OF WOMEN.


[glyphs] "woman sitting."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular feminine personal pronoun).

_Det._ of woman, goddess. 121 126 136


[glyphs] "woman with a tiara and having the bud of a lotus in her lap."

_Det._ of queen, goddess, woman. 112 112




III. FIGURES OF DEITIES.


[glyphs] "deity with the Atef-crown and the Zâm-sceptre."

_Det._ of the god Osiris. 138


[glyphs] "mummy holding the Zâm-sceptre."

_Pron._ Ptah. 69 142

_Det._ of the god Ptah.


[glyphs] "mummy sitting with Zâm-sceptre."

_Pron._ Ptah. 106 (hieroglyph reading from right to left) 136

_Det._ of the god Ptah. 142


[glyphs] "deity sitting with the Ten-crown and the whip."

_Pron._ ten.

_Det._ of the god Ptah. 65 142


[glyphs] "deity with the fourfold plume of the god Shu and the
Zâm-sceptre."

_Det._ of the sun-god Shu. 136 136 (where by a mistake of the scribe it
stands for [glyphs], Amen).


[glyphs] "deity sitting with the Zâm-sceptre and the double plume."

_Pron._ Amen. 37 62 63 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 71 71 94
142 144

_Det._ of the god Amen. 87 95 95 149


{157}[glyphs] "deity with the symbol of truth."

_Det._ of the god Amen. 95


[glyphs] "deity with the Khepesh-sword."

_Det._ of the god Amen. 95


[glyphs] "deity sitting on a throne and holding the Us-sceptre."

_Det._ of the god Amen. 95


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the Us-sceptre and the symbol of truth,
surmounted by the disk of the sun."

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the Zâm-sceptre and the white crown."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity surmounted by the disk of the sun and holding
two curious wands."

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the Zâm-sceptre."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the Zâm-sceptre, surmounted by the
snake-encircled disk of the sun."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity."

_Det._ of the gods Horus or Râ. 60 62 67 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the snake-encircled disk of the sun."

_Pron._ Râ. 96 144

_Det._ of the gods Horus or Râ. 31


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the double crown of Egypt."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk-headed deity with the symbol of life, surmounted by the disk
of the sun."

_Pron._ Râ. 58 60 62 63 64 66 67 68 70 Hieroglyph written from right to
left. 37 62 63 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 71 71 94 136 142
144

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 31 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the disk of the sun."

_Pron._ Râ.

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 27 125


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity with the Zâm-sceptre, surmounted by the
snake-encircled disk of the sun and the double plume."

_Det._ of the god Menthu. 132


[glyphs] "hawk-faced deity sitting on a throne with the Zâm-sceptre,
surmounted by the disk of the sun."

_Pron._ Râ.

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 31 125


[glyphs] "ass-headed deity with the crosier."

_Pron._ Set. 146 147

_Det._ of the god Set, whom we identify with the devil.


[glyphs] "jackal-headed deity with the symbol of life."

_Pron._ Anpu.

_Det._ of the god Anubis, cf. 99


{158}[glyphs] "ibis-headed deity."

_Pron._ Dehuti.

_Det._ of the god Thoth. 150


[glyphs] "ram-headed deity."

_Pron._ khnum.

_Det._ of the god Khnum. 87 128 128


[glyphs] "ram-headed deity with the Zâm-sceptre."

_Det._ of the god Khnum. 128


[glyphs] "ram-headed deity sitting."

_Det._ of the god Khnum. 128


[glyphs] "deity carrying an offering of flowers, surmounted by the papyrus
plant."

_Det._ of the god Hâp (the Nile). 137


[glyphs] "female deity standing and holding a papyrus reed, surmounted by a
throne."

_Det._ of the goddess Isis. 126


[glyphs] "female deity with the symbol of life, surmounted by a throne."

_Pron._ As·t. 106 136

_Det._ of the goddess Isis. 126


[glyphs] "female deity with a papyrus reed, surmounted by a pair of horns
and a throne."

_Det._ of the goddess Isis. 126


[glyphs] "female deity surmounted by the symbol of truth."

_Pron._ maâ. 144

_Det._ of the goddess Mâ.


[glyphs] "female deity with the symbol of life, surmounted by the symbol of
truth."

_Pron._ maâ. 37 62 62 64 64 65 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 68 69 69 70 70 87 96
122 130 130 144 147 Hieroglyph written from right to left. 71 71

_Det._ of the goddess Mâ.


[glyphs] "lion-headed female deity with the snake-encircled disk of the
sun."

_Det._ of the goddess Sekhet or Bast. 92 146




IV. PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY.


[glyphs] "face."

_Pron._ her. 70 123

_Det._ of face, front.


[glyphs] "left eye."

_Pron._ ar. 53 54 55 56 58 58 65 67 67 70 92 105 138 142 142 mer, *îri, *î,
*men.

_Det._ of vision. 31 48


[glyphs] "eye with eye-brows."

_Pron._ an, nâ, ân.

_Det._ of vision. 31 122


[glyphs] "left eye with eye-brows and a hoe(?) below."

_Pron._ beq, 118 uza.

_Det._ of eye, sun, moon.


[glyphs] "mouth."

_Pron._ Letter r. 5 27 31 31 31 38 39 39 39 39 48 49 49 51 51 51 53 55 56
56 60 60 60 60 63 64 64 64 65 65 65 69 69 72 86 86 88 88 90 90 91 91 94 97
97 97 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 106 106 {159}107 111 111 111 111 111
112 112 114 114 114 115 116 116 116 117 117 117 117 117 119 119 122 122 122
123 124 128 129 129 131 131 133 136 137 138 139 142 143 144 145 151 152 152


[glyphs] "two arms."

_Pron._ qa, 122 135 135 135 150 152 ka, *q, *k.


[glyphs] "two arms."

_Pron._ nen, 48 58 67 *n.

_Det._ of negation, defense, secrecy.


[glyphs] "two arms holding an oar."

_Pron._ khen. 86 128

_Det._ of rowing.


[glyphs] "arm holding a whip."

_Pron._ khu. 117 122


[glyphs] "arm."

_Pron._ Letter â, 56 57 70 91 92 95 99 116 116 121 122 124 130 132 137 138
144 149 152 152 ded. 60 60 70 70


[glyphs] "arm with lash."

_Pron._ nekht, 48 48 50 53 55 56 58 59 60 60 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 68 68 70
136 *n.

_Det._ of any violent action. 31 64 66 70


[glyphs] "open hand."

_Pron._ Letter d. 27 31 31 31 39 62 70 87 91 94 102 102 102 102 106 111 111
112 115 116 118 122 124 127 131 136 150


[glyphs] "legs walking."

_Pron._ îu, *i or u 86

_Det._ of progressive motion. 48 64 144


[glyphs] "leg."

_Pron._ uâr, 92 102 ped, red, men.

_Det._ of foot, motion, measure.


[glyphs] "leg standing on earth."

_Pron._ ger. 62 67


[glyphs] "knee."

_Pron._ Letter q. 39 39 39 39 60 61 61 70 86 86 94 94 97 102 102 102 106
106 111 111 112 112 112 114 115 116 118 119 124 144 Roman additions for
symmetry (?) 122 122 (reading from right to left).


[glyphs] "foot."

_Pron._ Letter b. 21 21 24 27 27 58 58 69 86 87 87 88 88 88 97 103 106 114
115 116 118 118 119 119 121 124 136 146


[glyphs] "piece of flesh."

_Pron._ f, auf.

_Det._ of flesh, part of the body. 56 56 56




V. FIGURES OF ANIMALS.


[glyphs] "bull."

_Pron._ qa, 48 48 48 50 53 55 56 58 59 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70 ka, *q, *k.

_Det._ of bull, quadruped. 100


[glyphs] "ram."

_Pron._ ba, 92 ser, *b, *s. 117

_Det._ of ram, the god Khnum. 104


[glyphs] "cynocephalus-ape."

_Pron._ dehuti, 150 ân, sa, *â, *zed, *ze.

_Det._ of monkey, the god Thoth.


[glyphs] "cynocephalus-ape."

_Pron._ dehuti. 49 150

_Det._ of monkey, the god Thoth.


[glyphs] "lion couching."

_Pron._ Letter l or r, both being interchangeable, 39 94 94 102 102 106 106
112 112 116 117 117 117 117 124 136 {160}142 144 âr, ar, shenâ.


[glyphs] "lion with a human face."

_Pron._ neb. 46 98


[glyphs] "jackal on a tomb."

_Pron._ seshta.

_Det._ of the god Anubis. 99


[glyphs] "hare or rabbit."

_Pron._ un. 24 27 62 86 100 101 148


[glyphs] "elephant."

_Pron._ âb. 119


[glyphs] "ass."

_Pron._ set. 146 146

_Det._ of the god Set, wickedness, tempest.




VI. PARTS OF ANIMALS.


[glyphs] "head and leg of a ram."

_Pron._ shef. 65


[glyphs] "lion's head and paw."

_Pron._ hâ. 95 122


[glyphs] "two horns."

_Pron._ ap, 99 *up.


[glyphs] "horn."

_Pron._ âb, in the dual âbui. 48 48

_Det._ of horn, opposition, attack.


[glyphs] "tusk of an elephant."

_Pron._ hu, 31 87 118 beh, *h.

_Det._ of eating, speaking.


[glyphs] "hind part and tail of an animal."

_Pron._ peh. 60

_Det._ of position behind, power, succession.


[glyphs] "leg of an animal."

_Pron._ khepesh, 60 âm, *â.


[glyphs] "piece of flesh with a bone."

_Pron._ ââ, 142 aâ.




VII. FIGURES OF BIRDS.


[glyphs] "eagle."

_Pron._ Letter a. 27 39 61 87 89 92 94 94 94 97 100 102 102 102 102 106 106
106 107 107 107 111 112 112 116 117 121 122 122 124 136 136 138 138 139 144
145 147


[glyphs] "eagle with a bunch of feathers on the breast."

_Pron._ ti, 88 114 neh, *n.


[glyphs] "sparrow-hawk."

_Pron._ her, 30 30 122 136 144 bak (name of the bird), 30 *nuter, *p.

_Det._ of hawk, the god Horus. 31 125


[glyphs] "hawk with the royal whip."

_Pron._ same as preceding.

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk surmounted by the snake-encircled disk of the sun."

_Pron._ Hor-Râ or Râ-Hor. 30 30 49 49 55 55 58 60 144

_Det._ of the gods Râ or Horus. 125


{161}[glyphs] "hawk with the double crown of Egypt."

_Pron._ her. 30 31 56 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk standing on the symbol of gold (nub)."

_Pron._ her-nub. 60 64 68

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ her-nub.

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk on a scaffold."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk on a scaffold preceded by the sign hen."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk on a scaffold preceded by the sign thes."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "hawk with the royal whip on a scaffold with the symbols of Upper
and Lower Egypt beneath."

_Det._ of the god Horus. 125


[glyphs] "vulture."

_Pron._ mut, 56 66 70 97 117 153 mert, ner, m, *qed.


[glyphs] "owl."

_Pron._ Letter m. 27 27 31 31 48 48 50 53 55 56 56 56 56 58 58 58 59 59 60
70 87 95 97 106 107 116 118 124 132 141


[glyphs] "owl with an arm written across it."

_Pron._ mâ. 66 131 144


[glyphs] "outline of an owl."

_Pron._ mer, 143 m.


[glyphs] "ibis on a scaffold."

_Pron._ dehuti. 36 49 49 56 58 60 61 150 150 151 151

_Det._ of the god Thoth.


[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ dehuti. 49

_Det._ of the god Thoth.


[glyphs] "ibis on a scaffold with the letters t and i beneath."

_Pron._ dehuti. 150


[glyphs] "heron."

_Pron._ khu, 63 64 97 *kh.


[glyphs] "a species of fowl."

_Pron._ zef. 69


[glyphs] "goose."

_Pron._ sa, 31 36 37 38 48 48 50 53 55 56 58 59 61 62 62 64 64 65 65 66 66
67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 72 89 92 94 95 96 96 96 97 99 106 106 107 107 111
122 136 136 138 140 141 142 143 144 144 145 147 147 150 150 151 151 152
men, hep, *s, *r, 117 117 (hieroglyph reading from right to left) *u.

_Det._ of bird, flying.


[glyphs] "goose flying."

_Pron._ pa, 84 *p.

_Det._ of bird, flying.


[glyphs] "swallow."

_Pron._ ûr. 58 58 90 131 139


[glyphs] "chicken."

{162}_Pron._ Letter u. 24 27 27 27 48 60 60 64 65 68 89 99 106 115 115 116
117 124 128 128 128 133 147 148 150


[glyphs] "chicken with an arm across it."

_Pron._ uâ. 66 70




VIII. PARTS OF BIRDS.


[glyphs] "right wing of a bird."

_Pron._ meh.

_Det._ of wing, rising, flying. 31


[glyphs] "feather, plume."

_Pron._ maâ, 99 130 shu, qeb, *m, *sh.


[glyphs] "egg."

_Pron._ sa, 39 63 66 68 70 102 117 122 *s.

_Det._ of egg, progeny, goddess, queen. 39 39 102 112 112 112 112 121 126
130 136 146 146 152




IX. FIGURES OF REPTILES.


[glyphs] "crocodile."

_Pron._ sebek, 103 seq, ad, *n.

_Det._ of crocodile, insolence, plundering, hiding.


[glyphs] "crocodile on a tomb."

_Pron._ sebek, anp.

_Det._ of the god Sebek. 146


[glyphs] "tail of a crocodile."

_Pron._ qem. 61 66 70 84 118


[glyphs] "cobra."

_Pron._ ârâ, 152 neb, *k, *r.

_Det._ of goddess, queen. 136 146


[glyphs] "cobra."

_Pron._ ârâ or mehent. 56 66 70 117


[glyphs] "snake."

_Pron._ ru, 97 *r, 102 *f.

_Det._ of snake, reptile.


[glyphs] "water-snake."

_Pron._ Letter z. 39 47 48 50 52 54 57 58 60 61 69 92 102 106 116 124 142
149


[glyphs] "Egyptian horned snake."

_Pron._ Letter f. 27 27 31 31 48 49 51 53 55 55 56 56 56 57 58 58 58 58 58
59 60 60 60 60 62 64 65 65 65 66 67 67 67 69 69 69 70 70 70 97 97 99 112
112 113 116 124 127 128 139




X. FIGURES OF FISHES.




XI. FIGURES OF INSECTS.


[glyphs] "bee."

_Pron._ âf, men, sekhet, kheb, kat or qet. Its pronunciation when combined
with the reed (suten) is unknown. We choose to transcribe [glyphs] by
suten-kaut, which means _the king of Upper and Lower Egypt_. {163}36 37 38
52 53 54 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70 72 84 94 95 96 96 96 97 99 106
106 107 107 111 122 127 128 132 135 136 138 140 141 142 144 144 147 150 150
151 151 152 152


[glyphs] "beetle."

_Pron._ kheper, 36 38 47 48 49 49 50 50 52 53 54 55 56 58 58 59 60 60 61 63
64 72 82 96 96 97 100 128 128 128 138 140 150 150 151 151 151 152 khep, *ta
117 117 in dual *taui, 39 39 112 112 *t.


[glyphs] "scorpion."

_Pron._ serq. 81 114 114 114

_Det._ of scorpion, wickedness.




XII. FIGURES OF TREES AND PLANTS.


[glyphs] "outline of a tree."

_Pron._ am, *m.

_Det._ of tree, shrub, plant. 118


[glyphs] "reed."

_Pron._ renp, 64 68 rep, ter, *qed.

_Det._ of year, season, germination, renewal.


[glyphs] "reed on the letter r."

_Pron._ renp, 48 ter.


[glyphs] "reed on land."

_Pron._ renp, rep, ter, mera. 90 115

_Det._ of year, season, renewal.


[glyphs] "point of a reed."

_Pron._ sput, 48 sbud.


[glyphs] "tuft of grass."

_Pron._ nekheb, 87 119 136 n, 65 65 142 142 *n.


[glyphs] "reed."

_Pron._ su, 37 60 62 63 64 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 69 70 70 71
71 126 144 146 suten 56 56 66 70 and in connection with a bee, 36 37 38 52
53 54 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70 72 84 94 95 96 96 96 97 99 106
106 107 107 111 122 127 128 132 135 136 138 140 141 142 144 144 147 150 150
151 151 152 152 *s.


[glyphs] "papyrus with the letter â drawn through it."

_Pron._ qemâ. 152


[glyphs] "papyrus on the letter r."

_Pron._ res. 84


[glyphs] "leaf."

_Pron._ Letter a. 27 28 38 49 51 59 62 62 63 65 66 69 72 87 88 89 90 94 95
95 96 96 96 97 97 97 97 97 98 98 98 99 101 102 102 106 111 111 115 116 122
124 128 132 132 136 137 138 144 149


[glyphs] "two leaves."

_Pron._ Letter î. 39 56 57 58 60 62 65 86 89 90 91 91 97 102 106 106 106
111 116 116 117 117 120 121 122 122 122 122 124 129 131 140 142 147 147


[glyphs] "leaf walking."

_Pron._ îu or aî. 132


[glyphs] "basin of water full of lotus."

_Pron._ Letter sh. 107 113 116 124 126


[glyphs] "bunch of lotus flowers."

_Pron._ hun, 119 129 as.

_Det._ of plant, flower.


{164}[glyphs] "a lotus plant."

_Pron._ meh, 90 152 152 ateh, kheb.

_Det._ of reed, water-plant. 139


[glyphs] "a papyrus plant."

_Pron._ res, 152 ha. 121


[glyphs] "lotus blossom."

_Pron._ ûz. 152


[glyphs] "lotus blossom with snake (z)."

_Pron._ ûz. 131


[glyphs] "papyrus blossom."

_Pron._ unknown. 152 In the combination [glyphs] the pronunciation is
*taui.


[glyphs] "lotus flower."

_Pron._ kha, 113 *kh.


[glyphs] "a bud."

_Pron._ *r. 102 102 122 122 136


[glyphs] "reed with two spikes."

_Pron._ ut. 148


[glyphs] "reed."

_Pron._ hez, 132 *het.


[glyphs] "part of a reed."

_Pron._ ut. 60


[glyphs] "bundle of reeds."

_Pron._ mes. 31 36 37 49 49 49 49 56 56 58 59 60 61 62 62 63 64 64 64 65 65
66 66 67 67 67 68 68 69 69 69 69 70 70 71 71 106 115 144 144 150 150 151
151


[glyphs] "pod of the acacia fruit,"

_Pron._ nezem, 136 nem.

_Det._ of sweetness, pleasure.




XIII. FIGURES OF HEAVEN, EARTH, AND WATER.


[glyphs] "heaven with the horizon on two sides."

_Pron._ pet, 56 56 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70 her, khî, *p, *men.

_Det._ of heaven, covering, height, superiority.


[glyphs] "disk of the sun."

_Pron._ râ, 27 27 31 36 36 37 37 37 38 38 38 46 47 48 48 48 49 50 50 50 52
53 53 54 55 55 56 56 57 58 58 59 59 60 60 61 62 62 62 62 62 62 62 64 64 64
64 64 64 64 64 65 65 65 65 65 65 66 66 66 66 66 66 66 66 67 67 67 67 67 67
67 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 71 71
71 71 72 72 72 82 87 94 95 95 96 96 96 96 96 96 97 97 97 97 98 99 99 106
106 106 107 107 111 122 122 127 135 136 136 138 138 138 140 140 141 141 142
143 143 144 144 144 144 144 144 147 147 150 150 150 150 150 151 151 151 151
152 152 *r.

_Det._ of sun, sun-god, light, time. 27 27 56 62 89 97 101


[glyphs] "disk of the sun with the cobra around it."

_Pron._ râ, 39 102 117 122 *r.


[glyphs] "disk of the sun with rays."

_Pron._ khu, am, *per, 142 *kh.

_Det._ of splendor, radiance. 62


[glyphs] "disk of the sun with two cobras around it."

_Pron._ *nuter. 39 102 117 122


[glyphs] "winged disk of the sun."

{165}_Pron._ hud. 87


[glyphs] "half of the sun with halo."

_Pron._ khâ, 39 48 50 53 55 56 59 64 102 117 117 117 122 122 122 127 136
150 150 151 151 *kh, *sh.


[glyphs] "moon."

_Pron._ ab, *a. 116

_Det._ of the moon in all its phases.


[glyphs] "star."

_Pron._ seb, dûa, 65 97 khabes, *s, *z.

_Det._ of star, constellation, god.


[glyphs] "land with clods of earth beneath."

_Pron._ ta, 39 47 48 49 49 50 52 54 57 58 60 60 61 65 90 102 106 117 142
142 in the dual taui, 39 39 47 47 48 48 50 50 51 51 52 52 53 53 54 54 55 55
62 62 62 62 64 64 65 65 65 65 66 66 67 67 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 98 98 102
102 136 136 152 152 *t. 102 102 102


[glyphs] "land with a line and a piece of rock beneath."

_Pron._ ta, 70 *t.


[glyphs] same as preceding with three clods of earth added.

_Pron._ ta, 84 88 88 90 90 115 116 116 117 *t.


[glyphs] same as preceding, doubled.

_Pron._ taui. 112 117 122


[glyphs] "earth with valleys and mountains."

_Pron._ either men 60 66 70 or set (doubtful).

_Det._ of country, land, place, people. 28 86 89 90 97 97 97 97 100 103 119
119 127 128 133 137 145


[glyphs] "earth with a stick to which prisoners were tied."

_Det._ of foreign country or nation. 132 137 138 144


[glyphs] "valley."

_Pron._ du, 88 88 88 *men, *â, *h.

_Det._ of mountain, mountainous region. 151


[glyphs] "sun rising over a valley."

_Pron._ khu, 55 55 62 89 generally in the dual khuti. 30 122


[glyphs] "land intersected by canals."

_Pron._ hesp, 137 sep, *n.

_Det._ of province, field, vineyard.


[glyphs] "piece of rock."

_Pron._ hu, *h.

_Det._ of land, earth. 84 90 117


[glyphs] "parcel of land (?)."

_Pron._ Letter m. 30 62 64 65 67 70 89 103 116 117 119 122 124 142


[glyphs] "block of granite."

_Pron._ aner, an, *men.

_Det._ of stone, rock. 88 88


[glyphs] "clod of earth."

_Det._ of earth, metal, sand, frankincense, flour. 58 58 58


[glyphs] "basin of water."

_Pron._ mer, 37 38 39 62 63 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 72 94
102 106 136 138 142 144 144 aa, *m.

_Det._ of water, fluid, lake, river, ocean, irrigation, inundation. 131 137


[glyphs] "basin of water with the symbol of water in it."

_Pron._ mer, 90 aa, *m.

_Det._ of water, fluid, lake, river, ocean, irrigation, inundation. 91 131
137


[glyphs] "basin of water."

_Pron._ Letter sh. 60 65 90 116 116 124 127 137


[glyphs] "a portion of land or sky."

_Pron._ khu, generally in the dual [glyphs] khuti. 30 49 49 55 55 58 60 144
144


[glyphs] "pond full of water."

_Pron._ him, 112 ba, peh.


{166}[glyphs] "undulating surface of water."

_Pron._ Letter n, 21 21 21 24 27 27 27 28 31 37 38 38 38 48 48 48 48 53 56
56 56 56 56 56 56 57 58 58 58 58 58 58 58 59 60 60 62 62 62 62 64 64 64 64
64 65 65 66 66 66 67 67 67 68 68 68 69 69 69 70 70 71 71 72 72 72 86 86 87
87 87 88 88 88 88 89 89 89 89 90 92 94 94 94 95 95 95 96 96 96 96 97 97 97
97 97 97 97 98 98 99 99 100 101 101 103 115 116 116 116 116 119 119 120 120
120 122 122 122 122 124 128 129 132 132 132 133 133 136 136 136 136 137 138
138 138 138 138 139 142 142 144 144 145 147 148 149 149 150 150 152 *mu.


[glyphs] same as preceding, repeated three times.

_Pron._ mu, 144 *m.

_Det._ of water, fluid, ablution, purification. 53 55 87 90 119 133 137 137




XIV. FIGURES OF BUILDINGS.


[glyphs] "plan of a village with streets on a hill."

_Pron._ nen, nu. 87

_Det._ of city, town, island, country. 24 24 31 36 51 51 52 53 56 58 61 66
69 69 70 84 86 86 86 86 86 86 87 87 87 87 87 87 88 88 88 88 88 88 89 89 89
90 90 90 90 90 91 91 92 92 92 92 92 92 97 101 102 103 105 105 114 114 115
115 116 116 116 117 117 117 118 118 118 118 118 118 118 119 119 120 120 120
120 123 128 129 132 132 133 136 139 144 145 147 148 149 149 149 149 149 150
151 152 152 152 152 152 152


[glyphs] "plan of a house."

_Pron._ per, 21 53 59 64 67 69 89 92 92 92 105 105 139 140 140 140 pu, 129
*p.

_Det._ of place. 51 53 55 55 62 89 92 102 115 123


[glyphs] "wall."

_Pron._ Letter h. 48 60 65 116 124 133 144


[glyphs] "plan of a house."

_Pron._ mer. 118


[glyphs] "plan of a house."

_Pron._ ha or ha·t, 21 51 53 92 102 103 115 123 *h, *kh.


[glyphs] same as preceding with the sign â and the feminine ending t in it.

_Pron._ ha·t-â. 56


[glyphs] "hawk in a house."

_Pron._ ha·t-her. 88 123

_Det._ of the goddess Hathor.


[glyphs] "plan of a fortification."

_Pron._ anb. 132

_Det._ of wall, fortification.


[glyphs] "corner of a house."

_Pron._ neh, qen.

_Det._ of corner, protection. 119


[glyphs] "tomb with four feathers, the symbols of truth."

_Pron._ mer. 118


[glyphs] "pyramid."

_Pron._ abmer.

_Det._ of pyramid, tomb. 90 132 143


[glyphs] "pyramidion."

_Pron._ benben.

_Det._ of heap, pyramidion. 58


{167}[glyphs] "obelisk."

_Pron._ tekhen, 58 58 men, *t.

_Det._ of obelisk, monument. 5 21 21


[glyphs] "stelé, slab."

_Det._ of stelé, monument. 148


[glyphs] "room of a temple with images."

_Pron._ sed, 58 afd.


[glyphs] "room of temple with images on top of the sign heb."

_Pron._ heb. 65 69


[glyphs] "room of a temple with a lotus blossom on top of the sign heb."

_Pron._ heb. 58 69 136


[glyphs] "bolt of a door."

_Pron._ Letter s, 31 39 39 48 49 56 56 56 58 60 60 61 62 62 69 69 87 89 92
94 94 94 94 94 94 97 102 102 103 106 106 111 111 111 114 115 116 117 120
121 122 122 122 124 142 144 144 145 147 150 151 152 ses.


[glyphs] "temple ornament on a scaffold."

_Pron._ khem. 89 139


[glyphs] "men climbing on poles."

_Det._ of an Egyptian festival. 89


[glyphs] "pylon of a temple."

_Pron._ an, 36 51 51 52 53 56 58 69 87 88 91 96 116 120 120 123 143 144 a.




XV. FIGURES OF SHIPS AND THEIR PARTS.


[glyphs] "rigging of a ship."

_Pron._ shep, 64 khep.


[glyphs] "boat."

_Det._ of boat, sacred barge of deities. 131 146


[glyphs] "mast (?)."

_Pron._ âhâ, 58 *h, âb.




XVI. FIGURES OF HOUSE FURNITURE.


[glyphs] "seat, chair."

_Pron._ as or us, 39 92 102 105 126 138 142 s, men, tem.


[glyphs] "back of a chair."

_Pron._ Letter s. 24 31 36 37 49 49 56 56 58 59 59 60 62 62 63 64 64 64 65
65 66 66 67 67 67 68 68 69 69 69 69 69 70 70 71 71 86 94 94 (reading from
right to left) 101 106 106 106 114 114 114 115 116 117 122 122 124 136 137
141 142 144 146 146 148 151 152


[glyphs] "top of a table with offerings."

_Pron._ hotep. 27 96 96 96 104


[glyphs] "stool."

_Pron._ kher, 97 *kh.


[glyphs] "bed."

_Pron._ aa, 86 135 *a.

_Det._ of coffin, cemetery, embalming.


[glyphs] "leg of a table (?)."

{168}_Pron._ deb, 87 118 zeb.


[glyphs] "post of a house (?)."

_Pron._ qed, 127 sat.


[glyphs] "floor (?)."

_Pron._ maâ, 142 *m.




XVII. FIGURES OF TEMPLE FURNITURE.


[glyphs] "flag in front of the temple."

_Pron._ nuter, 31 31 31 47 49 50 51 52 53 54 57 57 62 62 62 65 65 67 67 67
71 71 96 96 97 98 142 reading from right to left. 71 71 142

_Det._ of god. 102 115 150


[glyphs] "nilometer."

_Pron._ ded, 53 57 92 137 psed, *d.


[glyphs] "column of a temple."

_Pron._ sen, 97 112 *s.


[glyphs] "altar."

_Pron._ ab. 88


[glyphs] "altar with the symbol of truth on top of it."

_Pron._ men, amen, 97 set.




XVIII. FIGURES OF CROWNS AND INSIGNIA.


[glyphs] "royal head-dress."

_Pron._ Letter *k. 106 106


[glyphs] "royal head-dress with the cobra."

_Pron._ suten.

_Det._ of the royal hood. 46 117


[glyphs] "royal helmet."

_Pron._ kheperesh. 117


[glyphs] "white crown of Upper Egypt."

_Pron._ hez, 31 60 114 136 *nefer, *n.

_Det._ of crown. 64


[glyphs] same as preceding with the sign for "country" below it.

_Pron._ hez. 152


[glyphs] "red crown of Lower Egypt."

_Pron._ Letter n. 63 64 70 116 116 121 124 desher, 31 114 136 net.


[glyphs] same as preceding with the sign for "country" below it.

_Pron._ desher. 152


[glyphs] "the white and red crowns of Egypt combined into one."

_Pron._ sekhet, sekhent. 31 114 114


[glyphs] "loop of a crown."

_Pron._ Letter u. 27 27 39 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 106 111 111 116
117 117 117 121 122 122 122 124 136 136 139 146 151


[glyphs] "necklace."

_Pron._ usekh. 61


[glyphs] "two royal whips in a receptacle."

_Pron._ dem. 60 70


{169}[glyphs] "cross with a handle."

_Pron._ ânkh. 29 29 39 46 46 47 48 49 50 51 51 52 53 53 54 55 55 57 61 63
63 65 67 69 70 71 71 99 101 102 106 137 140 142 142


[glyphs] "wand, staff."

_Pron._ kherp. 38 72 138


[glyphs] "wand, sceptre."

_Pron._ sekhem. 142


[glyphs] "wand, sceptre."

_Pron._ sekhem. 146


[glyphs] "crosier."

_Pron._ heq. 39 49 51 51 52 60 60 60 96 96 96 106 112 112 144


[glyphs] "Zâm-sceptre."

_Pron._ us, 46 46 53 57 58 153 sem.


[glyphs] same as preceding with the feather, the symbol of truth.

_Pron._ us. 48 48 49 50 53 55 56 59 87 96 96 149


[glyphs] "sceptre with the head of a jackal."

_Pron._ us, user, 37 62 62 64 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 68 69 69 70 70
71 71 98 144 144 152 153 *hâ.


[glyphs] "royal banner shield."

Around the _fixed_ titles of the kings. 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70
102




XIX. FIGURES OF IMPLEMENTS OF WAR.


[glyphs] "post to which prisoners were tied."

_Pron._ âm, zâ, am, qem, neh, qa, ga, gem, *â.

_Det._ of foreigner, country, action. 56 89 120 126 150


[glyphs] "mace."

_Pron._ tep. 58


[glyphs] "mace."

_Pron._ kha, 27 56 64 88 *kh.


[glyphs] "cover of a quiver."

_Pron._ sa, 38 72 111 138 s.


[glyphs] "spear, javelin."

_Pron._ âa or â, 49 51 53 53 57 64 68 96 99 140 140 149 150 150 *â.


[glyphs] "knife."

_Pron._ qed, 91 144 sat.




XX. FIGURES OF TOOLS AND UTENSILS.


[glyphs] "fork."

_Pron._ Letter *m, 106 khen.


[glyphs] "hoe on earth."

_Pron._ sotep, 37 38 62 62 64 64 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 72 94
98 136 136 138 142 144 reading from right to left 71 71 ânp.


[glyphs] "sickle."

_Pron._ ma, 31 31 48 56 maâ. 98


[glyphs] "sleigh."

{170}_Pron._ tum. 27 27 51 51 51 53 56 57 90 102 133 151


[glyphs] "sickle with the sign maâ."

_Pron._ maâ. 95 99 130


[glyphs] "plough, hoe."

_Pron._ mer. 5 31 57 58 58 60 60 62 62 65 67 68 71 71 90 90 91 98 115 130
131 133 136 147 *ma, *m.


[glyphs] "bag."

_Pron._ Letter th. 87 106 115 116 120 124 132


[glyphs] "bag on land."

_Pron._ Letter z (really pronounced like our j). 113 116 124


[glyphs] "cover of a box (?)."

_Pron._ hep. 97 100


[glyphs] "spit."

_Pron._ uâ. 64 96 97


[glyphs] unknown utensil.

_Pron._ [ab], 143 sekhmer.


[glyphs] unknown utensil.

_Pron._ âb. 24 86 119


[glyphs] "mallet."

_Pron._ menkh. 59 66


[glyphs] "cloth wrung out."

_Pron._ nub.

_Det._ of gold, gold-metal. 58


[glyphs] same as preceding with the sign us.

_Pron._ usem (some pronounce it only sem). 119


[glyphs] "the sign nub with a leg written through it."

_Pron._ nub. 86 129




XXI. FIGURES OF CORDAGE.


[glyphs] "cord and line."

_Pron._ set, 97 as, as.


[glyphs] "cord with a cloth attached to it."

_Pron._ âu. 151


[glyphs] "loop."

_Pron._ qeb, 88 114 qes, ser, shes, *q, *g, *s.


[glyphs] "twisted cord."

_Pron._ ârq, sekhî.

_Det._ of writing, reading, book, tying, closing. 116


[glyphs] "twisted cord."

_Pron._ meh. 90 90


[glyphs] "two cords."

_Pron._ net, 136 *n.


[glyphs] "two cords."

_Pron._ âd. 131


[glyphs] "loop."

_Pron._ Letter û. 38 39 72 112 112 116 124 138 142


[glyphs] "loop with a knot."

_Pron._ rud. 98


[glyphs] "twisted cord."

_Pron._ Letter h. 27 39 56 56 56 60 62 65 69 90 97 97 100 102 113 115 116
119 124 129 137 142 142 142 142 142 147 150


[glyphs] "twisted cord with knot."

{171}_Pron._ sek. 146


[glyphs] "twisted cord with a large loop on top."

_Pron._ ûah. 56 56


[glyphs] "cord with two knots."

_Pron._ Letter th. 65 89 97 103 106 116 120 124 133 137 139 141 142 145 150


[glyphs] same as preceding on legs.

_Pron._ thet, 31 *t.


[glyphs] "round loop with two knots."

_Pron._ ut, 137 zet, heseb, *â.

_Det._ of counting, covering, embalming, sickness, opposition. 119




XXII. FIGURES OF VESSELS.


[glyphs] "jar of incense."

_Pron._ bes, 92 105 146 *b.

_Det._ of oil, wax, incense.


[glyphs] "jar of water."

_Pron._ qebeh. 53 55 97 152 152


[glyphs] "jar."

_Pron._ hen, 31 48 *h.


[glyphs] "pitcher."

_Pron._ khnum, 87 104 122 128 nem.


[glyphs] "two vases."

_Det._ of fluid, scent. 49 51


[glyphs] "vase."

_Pron._ Letter n, 27 36 51 51 52 53 56 58 58 58 58 69 86 87 87 91 106 114
116 117 117 119 120 122 122 123 124 128 136 136 145 nu, nen, men, khen.


[glyphs] "vase on legs."

_Pron._ an, 99 nen, *n.


[glyphs] "vase with handles."

_Pron._ ab. 5 48 88 136 141

_Det._ of heart, centre, valor. 60 122


[glyphs] "jar (?)."

_Pron._ ma or ma. 56 57 62 64 65 66 66 68 69 69 70 150


[glyphs] "vessel with flat bottom."

_Pron._ âu, âb, hen, usekh, *â, *u. 136

_Det._ of size, victuals, offering. 60


[glyphs] "censer with a flame and grains of incense."

_Pron._ *ba, *b. 111


[glyphs] "drinking cup."

_Pron._ ta. 60 128


[glyphs] "basket, satchel."

_Pron._ Letter g. 31 31 94 102 102 102 106 116 117 124 136


[glyphs] "basin."

_Pron._ neb, 31 39 39 39 47 48 49 49 49 50 51 51 51 51 51 52 53 53 53 54 54
55 55 56 57 58 60 61 62 64 64 65 65 66 67 68 69 69 69 70 70 70 92 96 98 102
102 112 112 117 117 121 121 122 122 136 136 in connection with the cobra
and the vulture, 56 56 66 66 70 70 117 117 153 *n.


[glyphs] "basin with a handle."

_Pron._ Letter k. 31 38 48 66 70 72 89 94 102 106 107 107 111 113 114 114
116 117 119 122 122 124 132 137 138 138 141 142 146 146


[glyphs] "box."

_Pron._ Letter p. 39 39 48 49 51 62 64 65 65 86 88 90 94 97 99 99 100 100
102 104 112 112 114 115 116 124 137 139 140 141 142 142 142 142 142 142 147




{172}XXIII. Figures of Temple Offerings.


[glyphs] "loaf of bread."

_Pron._ ta.

_Det._ of bread, nourishment, quantity. 69


[glyphs] "sacrificial loaf."

_Pron._ pau·t. 57


[glyphs] "sacrificial loaf."

_Pron._ sep. 58


[glyphs] "sacrificial loaf."

_Pron._ Letter kh. 21 54 56 56 59 60 60 63 64 65 66 70 97 114 116 117 122
124 128 128 146 146


[glyphs] "loaf of bread shaped like a pyramid."

_Pron._ du, 31 47 48 48 49 49 50 51 51 52 53 53 53 54 55 55 55 57 61 63 65
67 69 70 *d, 94 *th.




XXIV. FIGURES OF INSTRUMENTS FOR WRITING, ETC.


[glyphs] "brush, inkstand, and pallet."

_Pron._ ân, nâ, sekhî. 116


[glyphs] "papyrus roll with a string tied around it."

_Pron._ âsh.

_Det._ of book, writing, plan, drawing, any abstract idea. 48 60 61 62 65
65 67 70


[glyphs] "sistrum."

_Pron._ sekhem. 99


[glyphs] "guitar."

_Pron._ nefer. 47 49 50 52 53 54 56 58 60 61 71 71 71 71 90 96 97 98 132
141 150 151


[glyphs] "chess-board with chess-men."

_Pron._ men. 28 36 38 47 48 48 49 50 50 52 53 54 55 56 58 58 59 59 60 66 72
82 87 87 87 90 95 95 96 96 96 97 97 98 98 98 120 122 132 132 132 133 135
138 140 144 147 149 151 151




XXV. FIGURES OF LINES, ETC.


[glyphs] "one line."

_Pron._ a (as first person singular masculine or feminine personal
pronoun).

Sign of the singular. 27 27 31 48 48 59 60 60 62 63 64 64 64 65 65 66 66 66
67 67 67 68 68 69 69 69 70 70 70 70 84 87 88 89 89 92 92 92 97 97 97 105
105 107 114 119 129 129 136 137 139 143 149 149 149 151


[glyphs] "two lines."

_Pron._ i, 62 65 ui.

Sign of the dual.


[glyphs] "three lines."

_Pron._ u and sign of the plural. 39 49 57 58 60 60 60 61 64 64 64 65 65 66
68 68 70 88 96 97 102 150 151 151 151


[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ u and sign of the plural. 31 48 60 60 69 97 137


[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ u and sign of the plural. 69 96 121 122


{173}[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ u and sign of the plural. 106


[glyphs] same as preceding.

_Pron._ u and sign of the plural. 56


[glyphs] "two slanting lines."

_Pron._ Letter i. 87 88 89 102 106 115 116 119 120 120 121 122 124 136 139
150 150 150


[glyphs] "two lines crossing each other."

_Pron._ ûr, su, u, sesh.

_Det._ of crossing, mixing, increasing. 99


[glyphs] "semicircle."

_Pron._ Letter t. 21 21 24 24 27 27 31 31 31 39 39 39 39 39 39 47 48 48 49
50 51 51 51 51 51 52 53 53 53 54 54 55 55 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 57 57 57 58
58 58 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 61 61 62 62 62 64 64 64 65 65 65 65 66 66 66
67 68 68 69 70 70 70 70 84 86 86 86 86 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 88 88 88 88
88 89 89 89 89 90 90 90 90 90 90 91 91 92 92 92 92 92 92 92 94 94 94 95 95
97 98 99 99 100 100 101 101 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 102 104
105 105 106 106 106 111 112 112 112 112 112 112 114 114 114 115 115 115 115
116 116 116 116 117 117 117 117 117 117 117 117 118 118 118 118 118 118 118
119 119 119 119 120 120 120 121 122 122 122 122 122 122 122 123 124 126 128
129 130 131 132 132 133 133 136 136 136 136 137 139 139 142 142 142 142 142
142 142 144 144 145 146 146 146 147 147 148 149 149 149 149 149 149 150 150
150 151 151 152 152


[glyphs] pronounced ti (or possibly tet). 28 56 89 90 97 97 97 103 119 146
In the combination [glyphs] suten-kaut (pronunciation doubtful!). 36 37 38
52 53 54 56 58 59 60 62 63 65 66 67 68 68 70 72 84 94 95 96 96 96 97 99 106
106 107 107 111 122 127 128 132 135 136 138 140 141 142 144 144 147 150 150
151 151 152 152


[glyphs] "cartouche or royal seal containing the name of a king or a
queen."

Around royal names. 36 36 37 37 38 38 39 39 39 47 48 49 49 49 49 49 50 50
52 53 54 55 56 56 58 58 59 60 60 61 62 62 62 63 64 64 64 64 65 65 65 65 66
66 66 66 67 67 67 67 68 68 68 68 69 69 69 69 70 70 70 70 71 71 71 71 72 72
82 87 94 94 95 95 96 96 96 96 96 96 97 97 98 98 99 99 102 102 106 106 106
106 107 107 107 107 111 111 112 112 117 117 121 122 122 122 122 127 128 132
132 135 136 136 136 136 138 138 140 140 141 141 142 142 144 144 144 144 147
147 150 150 150 150 151 151 151 151 152 152


[glyphs] "cartouche or royal seal."

_Pron._ ren. 107

_Det._ of name, circle, inkstand.


[glyphs] "right angle with two quarter circles."

_Pron._ ap. 88


[glyphs] Sign of a _lacuna_ or a gap in the text. 58 59 66 67 68




{174}A GLOSSARY

OF THE EGYPTIAN WORDS OCCURRING ON THE NEW YORK OBELISK.


The words in this Glossary are arranged according to the Hieroglyphic
alphabet as follows:

       [glyphs]  a   | [glyphs]  b   | [glyphs]  l   | [glyphs]  k
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  a   | [glyphs]  p   | [glyphs]  h   | [glyphs]  g
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  a   | [glyphs]  f   | [glyphs]  h   | [glyphs]  t
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  i   | [glyphs]  m   | [glyphs] kh   | [glyphs] th
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  i   | [glyphs]  m   | [glyphs]  s   | [glyphs] th
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  u   | [glyphs]  n   | [glyphs]  s   | [glyphs]  d
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  u   | [glyphs]  n   | [glyphs] sh   | [glyphs]  z
                     |               |               |
       [glyphs]  u   | [glyphs]  n   | [glyphs] sh   | [glyphs]  z
                     |               |               |
                     | [glyphs]  r   | [glyphs]  q   |

As there was no fixed orthography among the ancient Egyptians the same word
is frequently spelled in many different ways. This will be noticed in the
following pages.--The plural of nouns or adjectives was formed by adding
three lines ([glyphs]) to the word or by repeating the Hieroglyphic sign of
the word three times.--The dual was formed by adding two lines ([glyphs])
or by repeating the sign twice.--The dot before the t (·T) denotes that the
t is the feminine ending, which was pronounced by the ancient Egyptians
only slightly or, probably, not at all.

{175}_Abbreviations_: E stands for East Face of the Obelisk; W for the West
Face; N for the North Face; S for the South Face. PYR. stands for
Pyramidion. EAST, WEST, NORTH, SOUTH denote the vertical columns of the
Obelisk on that particular side of its face. CENT. denotes the central
column. The small numerals refer to the pages of the book.


[glyphs] A


[glyphs] AM. Prep. "_in._" Adv. "_there, where_." W CENT. ^{59}

[glyphs] AMEN-MER-RÂ-MESES-SU. Second cartouche or the family name of
Ramses II., "_beloved of Amen, the Sun, begetting himself_". E NORTH ^{62
63} SOUTH ^{64 64} S EAST ^{65 65} WEST ^{66 66} W SOUTH ^{68 68} NORTH
^{67 67} N WEST ^{70 70} EAST ^{69 69}

[glyphs] AMEN-MER-RÂ-MESES-SU. Same as preceding. BASE OF E ^{71 71} S ^{71
71} W ^{71 71} N ^{71 71}

[glyphs] AMEN-MER-ÛSARKEN. Second cartouche or the family name of Osarkon
I., "_beloved of Amen, Osarkon_". SMALL SIDE INSCRIPTIONS E ^{72 72} S ^{72
72} W ^{72 72} N ^{72 72}

[glyphs] AN. "_Heliopolis._" E CENT. ^{56} S CENT. ^{58} N EAST ^{69} PYR.
WEST ^{52 53} SOUTH ^{51}

[glyphs] AR. Verb: "_to make, form, fashion; making, maker_". E CENT. ^{56}
W NORTH ^{67 67} S CENT. ^{58 58} N WEST ^{70} PYR. WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{54
55}

{176}[glyphs] ARÎTU. Noun, feminine, plural: "_works_". S EAST ^{65}

[glyphs] ARP. Noun: "_wine_". PYR. EAST ^{49} SOUTH ^{51}

[glyphs] ATEN. Noun: one of the names of "_the sun_". E NORTH ^{62}


[glyphs] Â

[glyphs] ÂA or Â. Adjective: "_great, large_". E CENT. ^{57} SOUTH ^{64} W
SOUTH ^{68} PYR. EAST ^{49} SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{53} In combination with
HA·T. E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] ÂNKH. Verb, &c.: "_to live; living; life_". E CENT. ^{57} NORTH
^{63} S EAST ^{65} W NORTH ^{67} N CENT. ^{61} EAST ^{69} WEST ^{70} PYR.
EAST ^{47 49} SOUTH ^{50 51} WEST ^{52 53 53} NORTH ^{54 55 55} BASE OF E
^{71 71} S ^{71 71} W ^{71 71} N ^{71 71}


[glyphs] U

[glyphs] UÂ. Adj. and adv.: "_one, sole, alone; only_". E SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] UÂF. Verb, &c.: "_to smite, ward off, vanquish; conqueror,
victor_". S WEST ^{66}

[glyphs] UÂF. Same as preceding. N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] US. Noun and adj.: "_strength, power; strong_". E CENT. ^{57} PYR.
WEST ^{53}

[glyphs] US. "_Thebes._" E CENT. ^{56} W CENT. ^{59} PYR. EAST ^{48} SOUTH
^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

{177}[glyphs] USEM. Noun: "_gold-metal; electrum_", S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] USER. Adj.: "_great, powerful, long_". E SOUTH ^{64} W SOUTH ^{68}

[glyphs] USER-MÂ-RÂ-SOTEP-EN-RÂ. The first cartouche or the royal name of
Ramses II., "_strong in truth, the sun, chosen of the sun_". E NORTH ^{62
62} SOUTH ^{64 64} S EAST ^{65 65} WEST ^{66 66} W NORTH ^{67 67} SOUTH
^{68 68} N EAST ^{69 69} WEST ^{70 70} BASE OF (all reading from right to
left) E ^{71 71} S ^{71 71} W ^{71 71} N ^{71 71}

[glyphs] UTU. Verb, &c.: "_to command, order; decree_". N CENT. ^{60}


[glyphs] Û

[glyphs] ÛAH. Verb: "_to place, put, establish_". E CENT. ^{56 56}

[glyphs] ÛRUI. Dual of the adjective ÛR "_large_", hence: "_the two large_"
obelisks, referring to the New York and London Obelisks. S CENT. ^{58}


[glyphs] B

[glyphs] BENBEN·T. Noun: "_pyramidion_". S CENT. ^{58}


[glyphs] P

[glyphs] PAU·T. Noun: "_circle, assembly, company_". E CENT. ^{57}

{178}[glyphs] PER. Noun: "_house_". W CENT. ^{59} NORTH ^{67}

[glyphs] PERU. Plural of the preceding word with the determinative of
"city": "_temples, sanctuaries_". N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] PER. Verb: "_to go out, proceed, issue_". E SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] PEHU. Plural of PEH "_back, behind_": hence "_farthest, extreme_".
N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] PESED. Verb: "_to shine, illumine_". E NORTH ^{62}

[glyphs] PET. Noun and adj.: "_heaven_; _heavenly_". E NORTH ^{62} CENT.
^{56 56} SOUTH ^{63} S EAST ^{65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67}
CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{68} CENT. ^{60} WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] PTAH-TATHUNEN. Epithet of the god "_Ptah_" of Memphis. S EAST
^{65}

[glyphs] PTAH-TATHUNEN. A variant (different spelling) of the preceding
word. N EAST ^{69}


[glyphs] F

[glyphs] F. Third person sing. masc. pers. and possessive pronoun: "_he,
him, his; it, its_". E NORTH ^{62} CENT. ^{56 56 56 57} SOUTH ^{64} S EAST
^{65} CENT. ^{58 58 58 58} W NORTH ^{67 67} CENT. ^{59} N EAST ^{69} CENT.
^{60 60} WEST ^{70} PYR. EAST ^{49} SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{54 55}


[glyphs] M

[glyphs] M. Prep.: "_in, for; at; as_; (made) _of; with_". E CENT.
{179}^{56 56 56 56} S CENT. ^{58 58 58} W CENT. ^{59} N CENT. ^{60} WEST
^{70} PYR. EAST ^{48} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] M. Same as preceding: "_in; at; from_". E NORTH ^{62} SOUTH ^{64}
S EAST ^{65} W NORTH ^{67}

[glyphs] MA or MA. Adv.: "_like, as_". E CENT. ^{56 57} SOUTH ^{64} S WEST
^{60} W SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{69} WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] MA. Same word as the preceding: "_like, as_". E NORTH ^{62} S EAST
^{65} WEST ^{66} N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] MÂ. The goddess of truth, "_Ma_". S EAST ^{65} N EAST ^{68}

[glyphs] MÂK. Verb, &c.: "_to protect, ward off; protector_". S WEST ^{66}

[glyphs] MÂK. Same word as the preceding: "_to protect; protector_". N WEST
^{70}

[glyphs] MENNU. Noun: "_monument; monuments_". S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] MEN·TU or SETU. Noun, plural of MEN·T or SET "_country_", hence:
"_countries, foreign nations_". N CENT. ^{60} S WEST ^{66} N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] MEN-KHEPER-RÂ. The first cartouche or the royal name of Thothmes
III., "_the stable and creative sun_". E CENT. ^{56} S CENT. ^{58} W CENT.
^{59} N CENT. ^{60} PYR. EAST ^{47 48} SOUTH ^{50 50} WEST ^{52 53} NORTH
^{54 55}

[glyphs] MENKH. Verb and adjective: "_to be beautiful; beautiful, kind_". S
WEST ^{66} Cf. also the causative form of the same word S·MENKH "_to
embellish_". W CENT. ^{59}

{180}[glyphs] MER. Verb, &c.: "_to love; loving; beloved; love; lover_". E
NORTH ^{62} S EAST ^{65} CENT. ^{58} W NORTH ^{67} N EAST ^{68} CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] MERÎ. Adj., derived from the preceding: "_beloved_". E CENT. ^{57}
S CENT. ^{58} W CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] MERÎTI. Lengthened form of the preceding word: "_beloved, lovely,
beautiful_". E NORTH ^{62}

[glyphs] MES or MESES. Verb, &c.: "_to bring forth, beget; born of; birth;
child_". E NORTH ^{62} CENT. ^{56} SOUTH ^{64} W NORTH ^{67} CENT. ^{59} N
EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] MESES. Same word as the preceding: "_to bring forth; birth; born
of; child_". E CENT. ^{56} N EAST ^{69}


[glyphs] N

[glyphs] N. Prep.: "_by, for_". E CENT. ^{56} SOUTH ^{64} S CENT. ^{58 58
58 58} N EAST ^{69} CENT. ^{60} Sign of the genitive case: "_of, in_". E
CENT. ^{56 56} SOUTH ^{64 64} W CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68} PYR. WEST ^{53}
Sign of the accusative case. E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] N. Same as the preceding. Sign of the genitive case: "_of_". E
NORTH ^{63} SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] NEB. Noun: "_lord, master_". E NORTH ^{62} SOUTH ^{64 64} S EAST
^{65 65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{69 69}
WEST ^{70} PYR. EAST ^{47 49 49} SOUTH ^{50 51 51} WEST ^{52 53 53} NORTH
^{54 54 55} Adj.: "_all, every_". E CENT. ^{57} N EAST ^{69} CENT. ^{60 61}
WEST ^{70 70} PYR. EAST ^{49} SOUTH ^{51} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] NEB·T. Feminine of the preceding word: "_mistress, {181}queen_". E
CENT. ^{56} where by mistake, perhaps, it stands for the preceding word and
means "_lord_".

[glyphs] Pronunciation doubtful, either NEB MUT NEB ÂRÂ or NEB SHETA NEB
MEHEN·T: "_the lord of the Vulture and Uræus diadems_". The title of
Pharaoh as the ruler of Upper and Lower Egypt. E CENT. ^{56} S WEST ^{66} N
WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] NUB. Noun: "_gold_". In the phrase HOR-NUB "_the golden hawk_ or
_Horus_". E SOUTH ^{64} W SOUTH ^{68} N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] NEFER. Adj.: "_good, gracious, benevolent, beautiful_". PYR. EAST
^{47} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{52 53} NORTH ^{54} BASE OF E ^{71 71 71 71} S ^{71
71 71 71} W ^{71 71 71 71} N ^{71 71 71 71}

[glyphs] NEFERU. Plural of the preceding word: "_beauty_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] NEN. Adv.: "_not_". S CENT. ^{58} W NORTH ^{67}

[glyphs] NEHEH or, possibly, only HEH. Noun, &c.: "_eternity; eternal;
forever_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] NEKHT. Adj. and noun: "_powerful, valiant, mighty; strength_". E
NORTH ^{62} CENT. ^{56} SOUTH ^{63} S EAST ^{65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W
NORTH ^{67} CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{68} CENT. ^{60} WEST ^{70}
PYR. EAST ^{48} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] NEKHTU. Plural of the preceding word: "_victory_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] NEKHTU. Same word as the preceding: "_victory_". E SOUTH ^{64} W
SOUTH ^{68}

{182}[glyphs] ENT. Lengthened form of the preposition N (cf. above). Sign
of the genitive case: "_of_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] ENTI (others read ENTET). Relative pronoun: "_who, which, what;
whose; whom_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] NUTER. Noun and adj.: "_god; divine_". E CENT. ^{57} PYR. EAST
^{47 49} SOUTH ^{50 51} WEST ^{52 53} NORTH ^{54} BASE OF E ^{71 71} S ^{71
71} W ^{71 71} N ^{71 71} Reading from right to left. BASE OF E ^{71 71} S
^{71 71} W ^{71 71} N ^{71 71}

[glyphs] NUTER. Same word as the preceding: "_god_". S EAST ^{65}

[glyphs] NUTERU. Plural of NUTER: "_gods_". E CENT. ^{57}

[glyphs] NUTERU. Same word as the preceding: "_gods_". E NORTH ^{62} W
NORTH ^{67}

[glyphs] NUTERI DÛA. Noun: "_morning-star_". S EAST ^{65}


[glyphs] R

[glyphs] R. Prep.: "_out, over, for, as, in order to_". E SOUTH ^{64 64} N
EAST ^{69 69} CENT. ^{60 60} PYR. E ^{49} S ^{51} W ^{53} N ^{55}

[glyphs] RU. Noun: "_mouth, end_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] RÂ. "_Ra, the sun._" E NORTH ^{62 62} CENT. ^{56 57} SOUTH ^{64
64} S EAST ^{65 65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66 66} W NORTH ^{67 67} CENT. ^{59}
SOUTH ^{68 68} N EAST ^{69 69} CENT. ^{61} WEST ^{70 70} PYR. EAST ^{48}
SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55} SMALL SIDE INSCRIPTIONS E ^{72 72} S
^{72 72} W ^{72 72} N ^{72 72}

[glyphs] RÂ. Same word as the preceding: "_Ra, the sun_". E SOUTH ^{64 64}
S WEST ^{66 66} W SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{69 69} WEST ^{70}

{183}[glyphs] RÂ. Same word as the preceding: "_Ra, the sun_". N CENT.
^{60}

[glyphs] RÂ. Same word as the preceding: "_Ra, the sun_". E NORTH ^{62} W
NORTH ^{67}

[glyphs] RÂ. Same word as the preceding: "_Ra, the sun_". E NORTH ^{62 63}
SOUTH ^{64} S CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67} SOUTH ^{68} N CENT.
^{60} WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] RÂ-HOR-KHUTI. A name of the sun-god: "_Ra, the hawk in the
horizon_". S CENT. ^{58} W CENT. ^{60} PYR. EAST ^{49} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] RENPE·TU. Noun, plural of RENPE·T "_year_", hence: "_years_". E
SOUTH ^{61} W SOUTH ^{68}

[glyphs] REKH. Verb: "_to know, understand_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] Same word as the preceding: "_to know, understand_". S EAST ^{65}


[glyphs] H

[glyphs] HAPU. Noun, plural of hap "_law, judgment_", hence: "_laws_". S
EAST ^{65}

[glyphs] HAR. Adj.: "_calm, satisfied, glad_". N CENT. ^{60}


[glyphs] H

[glyphs] HÂU. Noun, plural of HÂ "_limb_", hence: "_limbs_". {184}E CENT.
^{56}

[glyphs] HU. Verb: "_to smite, strike_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] HEB. Noun: "_festival, feast_". S EAST ^{65}

[glyphs] HEBU. Plural of the preceding word: "_festivals_". N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] HEB. Noun: "_festival_". In the phrase SED-HEB "_the thirty-year
period_". S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] HUN. Noun: "_child, boy, youth_". E NORTH ^{62}

[glyphs] HENÂ. Prep.: "_with_". E CENT. ^{57}

[glyphs] HER. Noun: "_face_". N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] HER. "_Horus_" with the double crown of Egypt. E NORTH ^{62} CENT.
^{56} SOUTH ^{63} S EAST ^{65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67} CENT.
^{59} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{68} CENT. ^{60} WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] See under RÂ-HOR-KHUTI.

[glyphs] HER-NUB. "_The golden Horus_." E SOUTH ^{64} W SOUTH ^{68} N CENT.
^{60}

[glyphs] See under NEHEH. E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] HEQ. Noun: "_prince, chief_". PYR. SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{52}

[glyphs] HEQU. Plural of the preceding word: "_princes, chiefs_". N CENT.
^{60}

{185}[glyphs] HA·T. Noun: "_temple_". PYR. SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{53}

[glyphs] HA·T-Â. From the preceding word with the adjective Â "_great_",
hence: "_the great temple_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] HEZ. Adj.: "_white_". Noun: "_the white crown_" of Upper Egypt. N
CENT. ^{60}


[glyphs] KH

[glyphs] KHÂ. Adj.: "_glorious, crowned_". E CENT. ^{56} W CENT. ^{59} PYR.
EAST ^{48} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] KHÂU. Noun, plural of KHÂ "_crown_", hence: "_diadems, crowns_". E
SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] KHU. Verb, &c.: "_to be glorious; resplendent; glory, splendor_".
E NORTH ^{63} SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] KHU·T. Noun: "_horizon_". E NORTH ^{62}

[glyphs] KHUTI. Dual of the preceding word: "_the two horizons_". See under
RÂ-HOR-KHUTI.

[glyphs] KHEPERA. The god "_Khepera_", literally "_the creator_". E SOUTH
^{63}

[glyphs] KHEPESH. Noun: "_strength, power, victory_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] KHER. Conj. and prep.: "_for_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] KHERP-KHEPER-RÂ-SOTEP-EN-RÂ. The first cartouche or the royal name
of Osarkon I., {186}"_made governor by Ra, chosen of Ra_". SMALL SIDE
INSCRIPTIONS E ^{72 72} S ^{72 72} W ^{72 72} N _72 72_

[glyphs] KHA·T. Noun: "_belly, womb_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] KHA·T. Same word as the preceding: "_belly, womb_". E SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] KHET. Noun: "_thing; things_". PYR. NORTH ^{54}

[glyphs] KHATF. Prep. and conj.: "_for, before; since, because_". N CENT.
^{60} WEST ^{70}


[glyphs] S

[glyphs] SA. Noun: "_son, child, offspring_". E NORTH ^{62 62} CENT. ^{56}
SOUTH ^{64 64} S EAST ^{65 65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66 66} W NORTH ^{67 67}
CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68 68} N EAST ^{69 69} CENT. ^{61} WEST ^{70 70} PYR.
EAST ^{48} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55} SMALL SIDE INSCRIPTIONS E
^{72 72} S ^{72 72} W ^{72 72} N ^{72 72}

[glyphs] SA. Same word as the preceding: "_son, child, offspring_". E SOUTH
^{63} S WEST ^{66} W SOUTH ^{68} N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] S·ÂHÂ. Verb, causative form of ÂHÂ "_to raise_", hence: "_to cause
to be raised, erect_". S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] SU. Personal pronoun third person: "_he, him; himself; she, her;
herself; it; itself; they, them; themselves_". E SOUTH ^{64} N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] SU. Same word as the preceding: "_he; him; &c._" N CENT. ^{60}

{187}[glyphs] S·USEKH. Verb, causative form of USEKH "_to extend_", hence:
"_to cause to be extended_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] SEP. Noun: "_time, times_", after numerals. S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] S·MENKH. Verb, causative of MENKH "_to be beautiful_", hence: "_to
render beautiful, embellish_". W CENT. ^{59}

[glyphs] SEN. Personal pronoun third person plural masculine: "_they; them;
their_". E CENT. ^{56 56}

[glyphs] S·HEB. Verb, causative form of HEB "_to be glad_", hence: "_to
cause to rejoice, gladden_". N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] SUTEN. Noun: "_king_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] SUTEN. Same word as the preceding: "_king_". S WEST ^{66} N WEST
^{70}

[glyphs] SUTENÎ·T. Noun, derived from the preceding word: "_kingdom_". E
CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] SUTEN-KAUT (doubtful!). Noun: "_the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt_". E NORTH ^{62} CENT. ^{56} SOUTH ^{63} S EAST ^{65} CENT. ^{58}
WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67} CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{68} CENT. ^{60}
WEST ^{70} PYR. WEST ^{52} NORTH ^{54} SMALL SIDE INSCRIPTIONS E ^{72 72} S
^{72 72} W ^{72 72} N ^{72 72}

[glyphs] SED. In the phrase SED-HEB "_the thirty year period festival_". S
CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] S·ZEF. Verb, causative form of ZEF "_to be {188}full_", hence:
"_to cause to be filled, provide with_". N EAST ^{69}


[glyphs] SH

[glyphs] SHEP. Verb: "_to seize, obtain_". E SOUTH ^{64}

[glyphs] SHEPES. Adj.: "_beautiful, glorious_". E NORTH ^{62}

[glyphs] SHEF·T. Noun: "_terror, awe_". S EAST ^{65}


[glyphs] Q

[glyphs] QA. Verb, abbreviated form of [glyphs] QA: "_to raise_". N CENT.
^{60}

[glyphs] QA. Noun: "_bull_". E NORTH ^{62} CENT. ^{56} SOUTH ^{63} S EAST
^{65} CENT. ^{58} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67} CENT. ^{59} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST
^{68} WEST ^{70} PYR. EAST ^{48} SOUTH ^{50} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] QEBEH. Noun: "_libation_". PYR. WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] QEM·T. "_Egypt_". S WEST ^{66} N CENT. ^{61} WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] QEMA. Verb: "_to create_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] QEN. Noun: "_force, triumph, victory_". N WEST ^{70}


[glyphs] G

[glyphs] GER. Verb: "_to seize, possess_". E NORTH ^{62} W NORTH ^{67}


{189}[glyphs] T

[glyphs] TA. Noun: "_land, earth_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] TA. Same word as the preceding: "_land, earth_". N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] TAUI. Dual of the two preceding words: "_the two countries_",
Egypt. E NORTH ^{62 62} SOUTH ^{64} S EAST ^{65 65} WEST ^{66} W NORTH ^{67
67} SOUTH ^{68} N EAST ^{69} WEST ^{70} PYR. EAST ^{47} SOUTH ^{50 51} WEST
^{52} NORTH ^{54 55} Written separately. PYR. EAST ^{49}

[glyphs] TASH·TU. Noun, plural of TASH·T "_boundary_", hence:
"_boundaries_". N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] TEP. Adj.: "_first_". S CENT. ^{58}

[glyphs] TEF. Noun, contracted form of [glyphs] ATEF: "_father_". S CENT.
^{58} N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] TEF. Same word as the preceding: "_father_". S EAST ^{65} W NORTH
^{67} N EAST ^{69}

[glyphs] TUM. The god "_Tum_". E CENT. ^{57} PYR. SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{53}

[glyphs] TUM. Same word as the preceding: the god "_Tum_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] TEKHENUI. Noun, dual of TEKHEN "_obelisk_", hence: "_two
obelisks_". S CENT. ^{58}


{190}[glyphs] D

[glyphs] DU. Verb, &c.: "_to give; giving; gift_". E NORTH ^{63} CENT.
^{57} S EAST ^{65} W NORTH ^{67} N EAST ^{69} CENT. ^{61} WEST ^{70} PYR.
EAST ^{47 49} SOUTH ^{50 51} WEST ^{52 53 53} NORTH ^{54 55 55}

[glyphs] DU·T. Noun, from the preceding word: "_gift, present_". PYR. EAST
^{49} SOUTH ^{51} WEST ^{53} NORTH ^{55}

[glyphs] DÛA. Noun: "_star_". In the phrase NUTERTI DÛA "_the
morning-star_". S EAST ^{65}

[glyphs] DEM. Adj.: "_all, complete_". N WEST ^{70}

[glyphs] DEM·T. Noun, from the preceding word: "_completeness, totality_".
N CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] DEHUTI. The god "_Thoth_". E CENT. ^{56}

[glyphs] DEHUTI-MESES-NEFER-KHEPERU. The second cartouche or the family
name of Thothmes III., "_the child of Thoth, beautiful in his
transformations_ (or _of beautiful form_)". S CENT. ^{58} W CENT. ^{60} N
CENT. ^{61}

[glyphs] DED. Noun: "_stability_". E CENT. ^{57} PYR. WEST ^{53}

[glyphs] DEDUI. Noun, dual of DED "_hand_", hence: "_the two hands_". N
CENT. ^{60}

[glyphs] DEDUI. Same word as the preceding: "_two hands_". N WEST ^{70}


[glyphs] Z

[glyphs] ZETA. Noun, &c.: "_eternity; eternal; forever_". E CENT. ^{57} S
CENT. ^{58} W CENT. ^{60} N CENT. ^{61} PYR. EAST ^{47} SOUTH ^{50} WEST
^{52} NORTH ^{54}




{191}INDEX OF PROPER NAMES.

_Transcriptions from the Egyptian are given in heavy type, those from the
Greek in Italics._

  AAHHOTEP, 17. dyn. 110
  AAHLU. [Elysium] 97 120
  AAHMES I., 18. dyn. 102 110 126 150
  AAHMES II., 26. dyn. 110
  AAHMESNEFERTARI, queen 18. dyn. 110
  AAHMESSAPAAR. 17. dyn. 110
  AANURU. [Elysium] 97 120
  AAREQ·T. [Philæ] 86 93
  AB, 10. dyn. 109
  ÂB. [Elephantine] 86 93 119
  Abd-el-Latîf, Arabic physician. 123
  Abd-el-Qurnah. [Thebes] 96
  ABDU. [Abydos] 88 93
  ABDU·T. [Abydos] 88 93
  ABEHIENKHEPESH, 15. dyn. 109
  Aboccis. [Abusimbel] 93
  ÂB·T. [Elephantine] 86 93 119
  Abuncis. [Abusimbel] 93
  Abusimbel. 27 93 113
  ÂBU·T. [Elephantine] 24 93 119
  Abûsîr. 91 93
  Abu-Sîr. 92 93 105
  Abydos. 88 93
  Achæans, Greek tribe. 121
  Ad, Arabic tribe. 93
  Africa. 4 118
  Africanus. 94
  AHTES, 3. dyn. 109
  AÎ, 14. dyn. 109
  AÎ, 18. dyn. 110
  AKAÜSHA (AQAÛASHA). [Achæans] 121
  _Akhes_, 3. dyn. 109
  Akhmîm. [Panopolis] 89 93
  _Akhoris_, 29. dyn. 110
  _Akhthoes_, 10. dyn. 109
  Albani Obelisk. 10 93 104 135
  ALEKSANDRES I. and II. [Alexander III. and IV.] 94 111
  Alexander I., 32. dyn., or Alexander III., the Great, of Macedon. 32 91
      94 111 142 144
  Alexander II., 32. dyn., or Alexander IV., of Macedon. 111
  Alexander VII., Pope. 140
  Alexandria. viii 8 35 39 40 41 42 43 44 72 73 79 81 82 91 94 95 101 102
      105 129 131 141 144 154
  Alexandrian Obelisk, in London. 8 10 41 95 130
  Alnwick. Alnwick Castle, in England. 95
  Alnwick Castle Obelisk. 10 95 147
  Alsace. 118
  AMEN, god. 35 37 38 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 87 88 94 95 96 97 98
      122 129 136 138 144 149 150 156 157 175
  AMENEMAPT, 21. dyn. 110
  AMENEMHÂT I., 12. dyn. 109 152
  AMENEMHÂT II., 12. dyn. 109
  AMENEMHÂT III., 12. dyn. 90 95 109 119 129 134
  AMENEMHÂT IV., 12. dyn. 109
  AMENHOTEP I., II., III., and IV., 18. dyn. 110
  AMENÎ Inscription. 127
  AMENMESES, 19. dyn. 110
  _Amenophis_, 21. dyn. 110
  _Amenophis I._, 18. dyn. 110
  _Amenophis II._, 18. dyn. 6 10 95 96 110 133 137 151
  _Amenophis III._, 18. dyn. 16 88 96 110 112 130 153
  _Amenophis IV._, 18. dyn. 29 30 89 96 101 (110) 149
  AMEN-RÂ, god. 29 37 88 95 97 100 119 128 133 136 142
  AMENRUD, 25. dyn. 110
  AMENRUD [Amyrtæus], 28. dyn. 98 110
  AMENTI. [Hades] 28 30 97 121
  _Ammenemes I._, _II._, _III._, and _IV._, 12. dyn. 109
  Ammon, god. 95                                                    {192}
  _Amosis_, 26. dyn. 110
  _Amosis I._, 18. dyn. 110
  Amru, Arabic general. 94
  AMSETH, one of the genii. 97
  Amyrtæus, 28. dyn. 10 98 110
  Amyrtæus Obelisks. 10 98 106
  _Amyrteos I._ [Amyrtæus], 28. dyn. 110
  AN. [Heliopolis] 36 51 52 53 56 58 69 91 96 98 111 123 144 175
  ANANTEF, 11. dyn. 109
  ANBU-HEZ·T. [Memphis] 132
  ANDÎNES. [Antinoüs] 122
  ANÎT. [Esneh] 120
  AN-MENTH. [Hermonthis] 87 99 120
  ANPU [Anubis], god. 99
  AN·T. [Denderah] 88 99 116
  ANTARÎUSH (ANTHALÎÛSH) [Darius I.], 27. dyn. 110
  ANTEF I., II., III., IV., and V., 11. dyn. 109
  ANTEF the Great, 11. dyn. 9 11 99 109
  ANTEFÂ [Antef the Great], 11. dyn. 99
  ANTHRÎSH [Darius II.], 27. dyn. 110
  Antinoüs. 103 122
  Antioch, in Syria. 117
  Antoninus Pius, Roman emperor. 111
  ANTUF, 11. dyn. 109
  ANTUFÂ, 11. dyn. 109
  Anubis, god. 89 97 98 99 100 147 160
  ÂPEHUTISET, 15. dyn. 109
  Apeium. 100
  APEPA, 15. dyn. 109
  APEPA, 16. dyn. 110
  _Aphrodite_ [Venus], goddess. 123
  Apis bull. 94 98 99 100
  Apollo, god. 118
  Apollinopolis. 118
  _Apophis_, 15. dyn. 109
  Apries, 26. dyn. 110
  APIU·T. [Thebes] 88 100
  ÂQENENRÂ, 16. dyn. 110
  Arabia. Arabic. 19 79 88 93 94 100 106 114 120 122 123 126 127 133 140
      142 149 153
  Arabia Felix. 147
  Aram. [Syria] 133
  Aram-naharayim. [Mesopotamia] 133
  _Ares_ [Mars], god. 131
  Arles, in France. 10 22 100 101
  Arles Obelisk. 10 100
  _Arses_, 31. dyn. 111
  ARTAKHSHASHS [Artaxerxes], 27. dyn. 110
  Artaxerxes I., 27. dyn. 98 110
  Artaxerxes II., Persian king. 135
  ARUNUTH. [Orontes] 137
  ÂSEHRÂ, 21. dyn. 110
  Asia. Asiatic. 86 96 101 125 128 137 138 146 147 149
  Asia Minor. 126 151
  Assuân. [Syene] 13 23 24 86 101 119 123 148 152
  Assuân Obelisk. 11 101
  Assyria. 133 137
  AS·T [Isis], goddess. 39 102 105 106 126 136 158
  Aswân. [Assuân] 149
  ATA, 1. dyn. 109
  ATEN, god. 62 63 75 89 96 97 101 149 176
  ATEN-RÂ, god. 96 101
  ATETH, 1. dyn. 109
  _Athene_ [Minerva], goddess. 136
  _Athothis_, 1. dyn. 109
  ATÎ, 6. dyn. 109
  Atmeidan Obelisk. 9 101
  ATRÎNES [Hadrian], Roman emperor. 122
  ATUM [Tum], god. 29 51 102
  Augustus, Roman emperor. 8 25 32 39 72 73 74 82 102 105 107 111 112 121
      141
  Augustus, title of Roman emperors. 117 122
  Aurelian, Roman emperor. 111
  Aurelius, Roman emperor. 111
  Aurora, goddess. 153
  Autocrator, title of Roman emperors. 39 102 106 111 117 122 136
  Avaris. [Pelusium] 92 102 123 139

  BAENNUTER, 2. dyn. 109
  BAKENRENF, 24. dyn. 110
  Balîkh, river in Syria. 117
  _Banon_, 15. dyn. 109
  Barbarus, Roman prefect. 39 73 74 82 103                          {193}
  Barberini [Pope Urban VIII.]. 103
  Barberini Obelisk. 9 103 121 134 144
  Bashmuric dialect [Coptic]. 113
  BAST, goddess. 92 98 103 105 146 158
  BAZAU, 2. dyn. 109
  Bedouins [Arabs]. 126
  Bejij [Crocodilopolis]. 5 103 114
  Bejij Obelisk. 11 103
  Belzoni, explorer. 13 103 114
  BENEMTHESTI [Benevento]. 103
  Benevento, in Italy. 8 10 103 104
  Benevento Obelisks. 10 103
  Beni-Hassan. 89 104
  BEQ·T [Egypt]. 118
  Berenice III., Ptolemaic queen. 111
  Berlin, in Germany. 10 105 130
  Bersheh. 15 89 104
  Bêth Shêmesh [Heliopolis]. 2
  _Binothris_, 2. dyn. 109
  Boboli Gardens Obelisk. 10 104
  _Boethos_, 2. dyn. 109
  _Bokkhoris_, 24. dyn. 110
  Böckh, historian. 108
  Bolbitine. 145
  Bonomi, Egyptologist. 11 104 147
  Book of the Dead. 33 34 98 99 104 118 134 136
  Borgian Obelisk. 10 94 104 135
  Bosphorus. 105
  Boussard, French engineer. 92 105
  British Museum. 10 98 135 139 145
  Brooklyn Navy Yard. 44 82
  Brugsch, H., Egyptologist. 26 105 108 118 119
  Bubastis. 92 102 105 110 139 149
  Bûlâk [Cairo]. 38 105 139
  Bunsen, historian. 108
  Busiris. 92 93 105 139
  Buto, goddess. 98
  Byzantium [Constantinople]. 8 105 113

  Cæsar, Julius, Roman dictator. 112
  Cæsar, emperor Augustus. 32 39 73 74 82 102 105
  Cæsar, title of Roman emperors. 39 105 106 111 117 122
  Cæsareum, temple. 39 105
  Cairo.  1 5 11 36 38 90 91 105 106 123 131 137
  Cairo Obelisk. 11 166
  Caligula, Roman emperor. 8 102 106 111 153
  Cambyses, 27. dyn. viii 1 106 110
  Campensis Obelisk. 9 106 134 141
  Campus Martius, in Rome. 107
  Canaan [Palestine]. 138
  Caracalla, Roman emperor. 102 111
  Carkhemish, on the Euphrates. 36 107
  Catania, in Sicily. 10 107
  Catania Obelisk. 10 107
  Cataracts of the Nile. 108
  Champollion, Egyptologist. 112 114
  Circus Maximus, in Rome. 121
  Claudius, Roman emperor. 8 102 104 111 134 148
  Clement XI., Pope. 131
  Cleopatra II., Ptolemaic queen. 7 111 112 114 140 142
  Cleopatra III., Ptolemaic queen. 111 142
  Cleopatra VI., Ptolemaic queen. 39 40 111 112
  Cleopatra's Needle, in New York. 8 10 41 42 81 112 136
  Colossi at Thebes. 16 96 112
  Columbia College, in New York. 72
  Commodus, Roman emperor. 111
  Constantine the Great, emperor. 8 10 22 100 101 111 113 129
  Constantinople. 8 9 101 102 105 113 141
  Constantius II., emperor. 8 111 113 129
  Coptic language. 90 105 113 116 145 149
  Coptos. 88 113 129 143
  Corfe Castle, in England. 114
  Corfe Castle Obelisk. 10 114 140
  Crocodilopolis. 5 11 90 103 114 120
  Cyriacus Matthæius, Roman senator. 153

  Dakkeh, in Nubia. 114
  Damascus, in Syria. 36 114
  Damietta. 92 105 115 133
  Dammêsek [Damascus]. 114
  _Dareios_, 31. dyn. 111
  _Dareios Hystaspes_, 27. dyn. 110
  _Dareios Xerxes_, 27. dyn. 110
  Darius I., 27. dyn. 110                                           {194}
  Darius II., 27. dyn. 110
  Dashûr. 91 115 130
  Decius, Roman emperor. 111
  DEB·T [Edfu]. 87 115 118
  DEDEFRÂ, 4. dyn. 109
  DEDKARÂ, 5. dyn. 109
  DEHUTI [Thoth], god. 49 56 58 60 61 115 150 151 158 159 161 190
  Della Passeggiata Obelisk. 103
  Delta. 84 90 93 98 102 115 130
  Demotic language. 114 115 116 124 145
  Denderah. 88 99 116 149
  Denmark. Danish. 154
  Denys of Telmahre, Syrian patriarch. 19 117
  Dêr-el-Baheri [Thebes]. 88 117
  Diana, goddess. 146
  Dimashku [Damascus]. 114
  Diocletian, emperor. 111 141
  Diodorus, Greek geographer. 132
  Dionysius Tell-Mahrâyâ. 117
  Domitian, Roman emperor. 5 7 8 9 10 22 94 103 104 111 117 139
  Dorsetshire, in England. 114
  Drah-abul-Neggah [Thebes]. 88 117
  Drah-abul-Neggah Obelisks. 9 11 118
  DÛAMUTF, one of the genii. 97
  DU EN BEKHEN [Hammamât]. 88
  Dümichen, Egyptologist. 61 100 118 133
  Dumyât [Damietta]. 115

  Ebers, Egyptologist. 118
  Ebjij [Crocodilopolis]. 103
  Edfu. 31 87 115 118 125 126 138
  Edrisi, Arabic geographer. 126
  Eileithyia, goddess. 119
  Eileithyia, district. 136
  Eileithyiapolis. 87 119 136
  El-Assasîf [Thebes]. 99
  Elephantine. 4 24 29 86 93 109 119 128 137
  El·Fatan-ibn-Jârûd, Arabic name. 80
  El-Kab [Eileithyiapolis]. 87 119
  El-Kâhira [Cairo]. 106
  El-Khargeh, oasis. 89 119 127 130
  El-Lahoon. 90 119 120 129
  El·Thabût-ben-Marrat, Arabic name. 80 119
  El-Tîneh [Thinis]. 89 119 150
  Elysium. 97 120
  England. English. 8 10 11 40 74 81 93 95 104 114 123 147 154
  _Epiphanes_, Ptolemaic title. 111 142 145
  Erment [Hermonthis]. 87 120 123
  Esdraëlon, in Palestine. 131
  Esmeade Obelisk. 11 120 141
  Esneh [Latopolis]. 87 120 146
  Ethiopia. 110 120 130 137 140 141 152
  Etruscans, ancient Italian tribe. 121
  Euphrates. 107 117 133 147
  Evarts, U. S. Secretary of State. 83

  Fayoom. 4 5 89 95 103 114 119 120 129 130 134 146 152
  First Cataract. 24 86 101 108 118
  Flaminian Obelisk. 9 121 141
  Florence, in Italy. 104 121
  Florence Obelisks. 10 121
  Fort St. Julien. 105
  Fostât. 106
  France. French. 8 10 22 92 100 105 130

  Galba, Roman emperor. 111
  Gallienus, emperor. 111
  Germany. German. 10 94 129 135
  Geta, Roman emperor. 111
  Gizeh. 4 91 103 121 122 127 128 130 132
  Glyptothek, in Munich, Germany. 94
  Gorringe, U. S. Navy. 40 41 43 46 83
  Graywacke Knoll, in Central Park, New York. 43 44
  Greece. Greek. 12 21 51 72 73 74 84 87 89 90 91 96 97 98 100 103 105 111
      112 113 114 118 119 120 121 122 123 125 126 127 128 129 131 132 135
      136 137 139 144 145 146 148 149 151 152 153

  Hades. 28 30 97 98 121
  Hadrian, Roman emperor. 5 7 9 22 103 111 121 122
  HAGER, 29. dyn. 110
  Hammamât. 16 23 88 122 129
  HÂP [Nile]. 137 158
  Harmachis, god. 122 125 148
  HARMÂ·T [Rome]. 144
  HA-SEBEK [Crocodilopolis]. 103 114
  HASHEPES (HÂ·T-SHEPES), queen 18. dyn. 122                        {195}
  HATASU, queen 18. dyn. 6 9 11 19 23 35 117 122 127 131 133 150
  Hatasu Obelisks. 122
  HA·T-HER [Hathor], goddess. 123 166
  Hathor, goddess. 88 98 117 123 166
  HA·T-NEBES·T [Damietta]. 115
  HA·T-ÛAR·T [Avaris]. 92 102 123
  HAUINEBU [Greeks]. 121
  Hayes, U. S. President. 83
  Hebrew. 84 133 140
  Hegira, flight of Mohammed. 126
  Heliopolis. 1 2 4 9 10 19 21 36 38 51 52 53 56 57 58 69 75 76 77 78 82 91
      96 98 101 102 104 107 111 121 123 125 131 133 134 141 143 144 151 153
      175
  Heliopolis Obelisk. 9 123
  _Heliupolis_ [Heliopolis]. 111
  HEP [Apis]. 100
  HEPÎ, one of the genii. 97
  HEQET (HEQ·T), goddess. 98
  Heracleopolis. 109
  HEREMHEB, 18. dyn. 110
  HEREMSAF, 6. dyn. 109
  HERHER, 21. dyn. 110
  Hermapion, Egyptian priest. 121
  Hermonthis. 87 99 120 123
  Herodotus, Greek historian. 132
  Herschel, astronomer. 13 123
  HESEPTI, 1. dyn. 109
  HEZEF, 2. dyn. 109
  Hieratic writing. 34 115 116 124 140
  Hittites, nation. 36 37 101 107 125 127 128 139 144 147
  Homer, Greek poet. 2 37 125 126 139
  Hophra [Apries], 26. dyn. 141
  HOR (HER) [Horus], god. 29 56 58 59 60 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 70 136 160
      161 166 181 184
  HOR-HUD·T [Horus of Edfu], god. 31 125
  HOR-EM-KHUTI, god. 30 122 125
  HOR-KHUTI, god. 29 125
  _Horos_, 18. dyn. 110
  HOR-RÂ, god. 30 125 160
  Horus, god. 28 30 31 47 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 75
      76 77 78 87 97 98 118 122 123 125 126 138 146 157 160 161 181 184
  Howara Pyramid. 129
  HUD·T [Edfu]. 87 118 126
  Hyksos. 92 101 102 109 110 126 147 149

  Ibn-el-Vardi, Arabic geographer. 79 126
  India. 13
  Innocent X., Pope. 139
  Ipsambul [Abusimbel], in Nubia. 93
  Ishmaël, Khedive. 40 111 126 137
  Isis, goddess. 86 98 102 106 114 123 125 126 136 138 140 158
  Isle of Purbeck, in England. 114
  Ismaïl, Khedive. 82 126
  Israelites. viii 134 147
  Istambûl [Constantinople]. 113
  Italy. 8 10 25 103 104 135

  Jacobites, sect. 117
  Jebel Barkal, in Nubia. 137
  Jebel Selseleh [Silsilis]. 86 126 128
  Jerablûs, in Syria. 107
  Jews. Jewish. 131 134
  Joseph, biblical patriarch. 2 127
  Josiah, king of Judah. 131
  Judah, kingdom in Palestine. 132
  Jupiter, god. 95

  Kadesh, in Syria. 35 127
  _Kaiekhos_, 2. dyn. 109
  KAÎSERES [Cæsar], title. 106
  KAKAU, 2. dyn. 109
  _Kambyses_ [Cambyses], 27. dyn. 110
  KAMES, 17. dyn. 110
  KANÂNA [Canaan]. 138
  KANRÂ, 10. dyn. 109
  Karnak [Thebes]. 2 3 6 88 112 121 122 127 149 153
  Karnak Obelisks. 9 10 11 19 127
  KARUKAMSHA [Carkhemish]. 107
  KEMBATHET [Cambyses], 27. dyn. 106 110
  KENEMTI [El-Khargeh]. 89 119 127
  KHABBASH, 28. dyn. 110
  KHÂFRÂ, 4. dyn. 109 127
  KHARTHÎ, 10. dyn. 109
  KHARU, Syrian tribe. 36 101 127 131
  Khefren or _Khephren_, 4. dyn. 91 109 127
  KHEM [PAN], god. 89 139                                           {196}
  KHENNU [Silsilis]. 86 128 147
  _Kheops_, 4. dyn. 91 109 122 128
  KHEPER, god. 28 29 128
  KHEPERA, god. 63 64 75 128 185
  KHEPER-RÂ, god. 98
  _Kheres_, 5. dyn. 109
  KHER-NUTER [Elysium]. 97
  KHETA [Hittites], nation. 36 37 101 125 128
  Khittîm [Hittites], nation. 128
  KHNUM, god. 86 87 98 120 128 158 159
  KHNUM-HOTEP Tomb. 104
  KHNUM-RÂ, god. 29 128
  KHNUMU, god. 128
  KHSHÎARUSH [Xerxes I.], 27. dyn. 110
  KHU-EN-ATEN [Amenôphis IV.], 18. dyn. 97
  KHU-EN-ATEN [Tel-el-Amarna]. 89
  KHUFU, 4. dyn. 5 109 128 133 143 148
  Kircher, mathematician. 79 129
  KÎSERS [Cæsar], title. 111 117 122
  Kôm-Omboo. 86 129 137
  Kossêr, on the Red Sea. 23 88 122 129
  Kuft [Coptos]. 88 114 129
  KUSH [Ethiopia. Nubia]. 137

  Labyrinth. 90 95 120 129
  Lateran Obelisk. 9 20 23 25 129
  Latin. 72 73 74
  Latopolis [Esneh]. 120
  Lauth, Egyptologist. 108
  Lenormant, Orientalist. 128
  Lepsius, Egyptologist. 4 5 36 37 99 104 105 108 119 129 130 155
  Lepsius Obelisk. 10 118 130
  Lesseps, engineer. 148
  _Leukos-Limen_ [Kossêr]. 129
  Libyan Desert. 59 90 130 137
  Lisht Pyramid. 91 130
  London. 8 10 36 39 41 81 91 95 102 154
  London Obelisk. 8 25 40 59 72 73 130 177
  Louis XIV., king of France. 101
  Louis Philippe, king of France. 130
  Lower Egypt. 1 16 30 31 48 51 52 53 54 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66
      67 68 69 70 72 75 76 77 78 84 90 94 95 96 97 99 105 106 107 111 113
      114 115 117 121 122 123 127 128 130 132 135 136 137 138 140 141 142
      144 145 147 149 150 151 152 161 162 168 181 187
  Lucilius Lupus. 104
  Lucina, goddess. 119 136
  LUKU (LEKA) [Lycians], Greek tribe of Asia Minor. 121
  Luxor [Thebes]. 2 4 9 88 112 130 150
  Luxor Obelisk, in Paris. 8 10 23 41 130
  Luxor Obelisk, in Thebes. 9 130
  Lycians, Greek tribe of Asia Minor. 121

  MÂ (MAÂ), goddess. 37 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 76 78 87 95 96 98 99
      122 130 131 144 147 152 158 177 179
  MÂÂD Boat, of Râ. 22 131
  Macedon. Macedonian. 94 111
  Mahutean Obelisk. 10 131 139
  MÂKARÂ [Hatasu], queen 18. dyn. 6 35 100 110 122 131
  MÂKETHA [Megiddo], in Syria. 132
  Manetho, Egyptian priest. 108 111 126
  Maqdâm-ibn-el·`Amr-ben-abî-Re`âl, an Arabic name. 80 131
  Mareotis Lake. 91 131 133
  Mariette, Egyptologist. 105 108
  Mark Antony, Roman triumvir. 112
  Mars, god. 61 131 132
  Matarîyeh [Heliopolis]. 1 5 36 91 123 131
  Mecca, in Arabia. 126
  Medîna, in Arabia. 126
  Medînet-Habu [Thebes]. 88 113 131
  Mediterranean Sea. 90 118 131
  Mêdûn [Meydoom]. 133
  Megiddo, in Syria. 36 131
  MEH·T [Lower Egypt]. 90
  Memnon, Vocal. 96 153
  Memnonium, temple. 16 88 132
  Memphi [Memphis]. 90
  Memphis. 4 10 19 65 76 90 91 93 100 106 109 113 115 121 127 132 133 142
      143 145 151 178
  Memphitic dialect [Coptic]. 113
  MENA, 1. dyn. 109 132
  Mendes. 92 132 139
  Menephthah I., 19. dyn. 121 134
  _Menephthes_, 19. dyn. 110
  _Menephthes Siphthas_, 19. dyn. 110                               {197}
  _Menes_, 1. dyn. 89 108 109 132 150
  MENKAUHER, 5. dyn. 109
  MENKAURÂ, 4. dyn. 109 135
  _Menkheres_, 4. dyn. 109
  _Menkheres_, 5. dyn. 109
  MEN-NEFER·T [Memphis]. 90 132
  MENTHU [Mars], god. 87 120 131 132 133 157
  MENTHUHOTEP I., II., III., and IV., 11. dyn. 109
  Menzaleh Lake. 92 115 133
  _Mephre_ [Hatasu], queen 18. dyn. 110
  MERAB, prince 4. dyn. 5 133
  MERBAPEN, 1. dyn. 109
  MERENHER, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  MERENPTAH I. and II., 19. dyn. 110
  MERÎ·T [Mareotis Lake]. 91 131 133
  Merriam, classical philologist. 72 103
  MER·T [Egypt]. 118
  MER-TUM·T [Meydoom]. 90 133
  MER ÛR [Moeris Lake]. 90
  Mesopotamia. 36 96 133
  Mesphres [Thothmes III.]. 36 133
  Metropolitan Museum of Art, in New York. 43 72 82
  Meydoom or Meydoon. 90 120 130 133
  _Miebis_, 1. dyn. 109
  Minerva, goddess. 136
  Misr [Egypt]. 118 133
  Mîtrahîneh [Memphis]. 91 113 132 133
  Mizrayim [Egypt]. 84 133
  Mnevis bull. 98 133
  Moeris Lake. 90 95 120 134
  Môf [Memphis]. 132
  Mohammed. 106 126
  Mohammedans. viii 79 94 106 118
  Monte Cavallo Obelisk. 9 134 148
  Monte Citorio Obelisk. 22 25 106 134
  Monte Pincio Obelisk. 22 103 134
  Moses. viii 2 134 147
  Munich, in Germany. 10 94
  MU-QED·T [Red Sea]. 144
  MUT, goddess. 99
  Mycerinus, 4. dyn. 91 109 135

  NAHAR [Syria]. 133
  Nahasb Obelisk. 11 135
  Napata, in Nubia. 137
  Naples, in Italy. 10 94 103 104 135
  Naples Obelisk. 135
  Napoleon I. 105
  Napoleon III. 101
  NARANI [Nero]. 136
  Naville, Egyptologist. 104
  NEBKA, 3. dyn. 109
  NEBKARÂ, 3. dyn. 109
  NEBNEMRÂ, 11. dyn. 109
  Neco, 26. dyn. 131
  Nectanebo I., 30. dyn. 9 111 135
  Nectanebo II., 30. dyn. 111
  NEFERARIKARÂ, 5. dyn. 109
  NEFERARKARÂ, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERHOTEP, 14. dyn. 109
  NEFERKA, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKAHER, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂ, 2. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂ, 3. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂ, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂÂNNU, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂKHENDU, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂNEBÎ, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂPEPÎSENEB, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKARÂTEREREL, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKASEKER, 2. dyn. 109
  NEFERKAURÂ, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  NEFERKHÂRÂ, 5. dyn. 109
  NEFERSEH...., 7.-10. dyn. 109
  Neith, goddess. 92 120 136
  NEKAU, 26. dyn. 110
  _Nekhao II._, 26. dyn. 110
  NEKHEB or NEKHEB·T, goddess. 87 119 136
  NEKHEB·T [Eileithyiapolis]. 87 119 136
  _Nekherophes_, 3. dyn. 109
  _Nekhthanebos_, 30. dyn. 111
  _Nekhtharebes_, 30. dyn. 111
  NEKHTHERHEB, 30. dyn. 111 136
  NEKHTNEBEF, 30. dyn. 111
  _Nepherkheres_, 2. dyn. 109
  _Nepherkheres_, 5. dyn. 109
  _Nephorites I._, 29. dyn. 110
  Nephthys, goddess. 136
  Nero, Roman emperor. 11 102 111 136                               {198}
  Nerva, Roman emperor. 111
  NET [Neith], goddess. 136
  NETAQERTI, queen 6. dyn. 109
  New York. 8 36 40 41 42 43 44 82 91 102
  New York Obelisk. 8 20 23 25 39 46 49 72 73 79 81 91 112 136 151 177
  NIAFÂURUD, 29. dyn. 110
  Nile. 2 4 16 27 84 86 88 90 91 92 93 102 103 105 106 108 115 117 118 119
      127 130 137 140 143 145 148 152 158
  Nineveh, capital of Assyria. 36 96 137
  _Nitokris_, queen 6. dyn. 109
  Nô [Thebes]. 149
  Nôf [Memphis]. 132
  Northumberland, in England. 95 147
  Nubia. 86 93 114 120 137 140
  NUBÎ·T [Ombos]. 86 129 137
  NU·T [Thebes]. 149
  NU·T-AMEN [Thebes]. 87 149
  NU·T-Â·T [Thebes]. 149

  Octavianus [emperor Augustus]. 102
  Octavius [emperor Augustus]. 112
  _Okhos_, 31. dyn. 111
  Omar, caliph. 94
  Omboo [Ombos]. 129
  Ombos. 29 86 129 137 146
  On [Heliopolis]. 123
  _Onnos_, 5. dyn. 109
  Orontes, river in Syria. 36 137 147
  Osarkon I., 22. dyn. 38 71 72 75 76 77 78 96 110 128 138 175 185
  Osarkon II., 22. dyn. 110
  Osarkon III., 23. dyn. 110
  Osiris, god. 61 87 88 92 94 97 98 100 105 125 126 138 146 150 156
  _Osokhor_, 21. dyn. 110
  _Osorkhon I._ and _II._, 22. dyn. 110
  _Osorkhon III._, 23. dyn. 110
  _Osymandyas_ [Ramses II.]. 132
  Otho, Roman emperor. 111
  _Othoes_, 6. dyn. 109

  Padan-aram [Mesopotamia]. 133
  PAINEZEM I., II., and III., 21. dyn. 110
  Palestine. 35 115 131 138 144 147
  PAMAÎ, 22. dyn. 110
  Pamphili [Pope Innocent X.]. 139
  Pamphilian Obelisk. 9 139 141
  Pan, god. 139
  Panopolis. 89 93 139
  Pantheon, in Rome. 131
  Pantheon Obelisk. 131 139
  _Parakhistæ_, embalmers. 134
  Paris, in France. 8 10 23 41 130
  PASEBKHÂNU I. and II., 21. dyn. 110
  _Pasht_ [Bast], goddess. 92 103 139 146
  PA TA MERA·T [Delta]. 90 115
  PA TA RES [Upper Egypt]. 84
  PEDUSABAST, 23. dyn. 110
  Pelusium. 92 102 123 139
  PENTAÛR, scribe. 37 139
  PEPÎ I. and II., 6. dyn. 109
  PERABSEN, 2. dyn. 109
  PER-BA-NEB-DED·T [Mendes]. 92 139
  PER-BAS·T [Bubastis]. 92 105 139
  PER-KHEM·T [Panopolis]. 89 139
  Persia. Persians. 94 98 106 110 111 127 135
  PER-USAR·T [Busiris]. 92 105 139
  PESERK·T [Pselcis], in Nubia. 114
  _Petsybastis_, 23. dyn. 110
  Pharos of Alexandria. 94
  Philæ. 4 7 9 10 22 84 86 93 108 112 114 140
  Philæ Obelisk. 9 112 140
  Philip II., king of Macedon. 94
  Philippus Aridæus, 32. dyn. 111
  _Phiops I._ and _II._, 6. dyn. 109
  PHÎULÎUPÛS, 32. dyn. 111
  _Phusemes_, 21. dyn. 110
  PIÂNKHÎ I., 24. dyn. 21 110 140
  PIÂNKHÎ II., 24. dyn. 110
  Piazza della Minerva Obelisk. 10 140
  Piazza del Popolo Obelisk. 141 145
  Piazza di San Pietro, in Rome. 153
  Piazza Navona Obelisk. 22 139 141
  Pî-Bêseth [Bubastis]. 105
  PIREQ [Philæ]. 86
  Pius VI., Pope. 107 134 145
  Pius VII., Pope. 103
  Place de Concorde, in Paris. 130
  Pliny, Roman author. 36 133 141
  Pompeius, Roman prefect. 141
  Pompey's Pillar, in Alexandria. 91 94 141
  Pontius, architect. 39 73 74 82 141                               {199}
  Poole, R. S., archæologist. 108
  Porta del Popolo, in Rome. 11 120 141
  Præneste, in Italy. 104 135
  Prioli Obelisk. 9 141
  Probus, emperor. 111
  Psametik I., 26. dyn. 110 115 141
  Psametik II., 26. dyn. 7 9 10 22 107 110 140 141 153
  Psametik III., 26. dyn. 106 110
  _Psametikhos I._, _II._, and _III._, 26. dyn. 110
  _Psamuthis_, 29. dyn. 110
  Pselcis, in Nubia. 114
  PSEMTHEK, 26. dyn. 141
  PSIMUT, 29. dyn. 110
  _Psinakhes_, 21. dyn. 110
  PTAH, god. 39 65 69 76 78 90 98 100 102 105 106 132 136 142 146 147 156
      178
  PTAH-SEKER-USAR, god. 142
  Ptah-Sokar-Osiris, god. 29 142 145
  PTAH-TATHUNEN, god. 65 142 149 178
  Ptolemies, the 33. dyn. 9 21 22 81 94 111 114 124 142
  Ptolemy I. Sotêr I., 33. dyn. 111 142
  Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy III. Euergetes I., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy IV. Philopator I., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, 33. dyn. 111 145
  Ptolemy VI. Eupator, 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy VII. Philometor, 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy VIII. Philopator II., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy IX. Euergetes II., 33. dyn. 7 10 111 112 114 140 142
  Ptolemy X. Sotêr II., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy XI. Alexander I., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy XII. Alexander II., 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy XIII. Neos Dionysius, 33. dyn. 111
  Ptolemy XIV., 33. dyn. 112
  Ptolemy XV., 33. dyn. 112
  Ptolemy XVI. Cæsarion, 33. dyn. 111 112
  PTÛLMÎS [Ptolemy], 33. dyn. 142
  Publius Rubrius Barbarus, Roman prefect. 39 73 74 82 103
  PUN·T [Arabia]. 100 142
  Pusiri [Busiris]. 105
  Pyramids. 12 27 91 120 143

  QEBEH, 1. dyn. 109
  QEBEHSENEF, one of the genii. 97
  QEBTI·T [Coptos]. 88 114 143
  QEDESH [Kadesh], in Syria. 127
  QEM·T [Egypt]. 61 66 70 84 118 143 188
  QERTI, cataracts of Elephantine. 119
  QERTUS DABARSA [Claudius Tiberius]. 111
  QÎSERS [Cæsar]. 102
  QLÛPEDRA·T [Cleopatra II.]. 112
  QLÛPETER [Cleopatra VI.]. 39 112
  Quirinal, in Rome. 134
  Qurnah [Thebes]. 88 143

  RÂ, god. 21 22 27 30 31 36 37 38 39 46 47 48 49 50 52 53 54 55 56 57 58
      59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 75 76 77 78 87 91 94 95 96
      97 98 99 101 102 106 107 111 117 122 123 127 128 130 131 132 133 135
      136 138 140 141 142 143 146 147 150 151 152 157 160 164 175 177 179
      182 183 185 186
  RÂ-HOR, god. 160
  RÂ-HOR-KHUTI, god. 28 29 30 46 47 49 55 58 59 60 75 76 77 78 144 183 184
      185
  Rameseum, temple. 132
  _Ramesses I._, 19. dyn. 110
  _Ramesses III._, _IV._, _V._, _VI._, _VII._, _VIII._, _IX._, _X._, _XI._,
      _XII._, _XIII._, and _XIV._, 20. dyn. 110
  _Ramesses Miammun_ [Ramses II.], 19. dyn. 110
  Ramses I., 19. dyn. 110
  Ramses II., 19. dyn. viii 4 7 8 9 10 11 16 36 37 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69
      70 71 75 76 77 78 88 91 93 96 104 110 112 113 117 121 127 128 130 131
      132 134 139 140 143 144 145 146 147 148 152 153 175 177
  Ramses III., 20. dyn. 110 112 117 131 144
  Ramses IV., V., VI., VII., VIII., IX., X., XI., XII., and XIII., 20. dyn.
      110
  RÂNUSER, 5. dyn. 109
  RÂQEDÎ·T [Alexandria]. 91 144
  _Rathures_, 5. dyn. 109                                           {200}
  Redesieh. 86 144
  Red Sea. 86 88 122 129 144 148
  Rehoboam, king of Judah. 132
  RETHENNU, Syrian tribe. 145
  _Rhakotis_ [Alexandria]. 91 94 144
  Rhoda, island in the Nile. 137
  Romans. viii 4 5 7 10 11 20 22 24 25 48 51 61 81 82 93 94 95 102 103 105
      106 108 111 113 116 117 118 119 120 121 123 131 132 136 139 140 141
      143 145 153
  Rome. 5 7 8 9 11 20 22 23 25 93 103 104 107 111 120 121 129 131 134 139
      140 141 144 145 148 153 154
  Rosetta. 91 145
  Rosetta Stone. 105 116 121 145
  Rotennu, Syrian tribe. 36 101 145
  RU-ÂU·T [Troy in Egypt]. 151
  RU-HUN·T [El-Lahoon]. 119
  RUPU RUHUN [Labyrinth]. 129
  RUSETI [Hades]. 97

  Sabina, queen. 121
  SÂBÎNA·T [Sabina]. 121
  Saccarah [Memphis]. 91 132 145
  Sa-el-Hajar [Saïs]. 92 145
  Sahidic dialect [Coptic]. 113
  SAHURÂ, 5. dyn. 93 109
  Saï [Saïs]. 145
  St. Anthony's Cross. 99
  St. Ephraim Syrus, Syrian patriarch. 19 148
  Saïs. 4 10 92 110 140 145 146
  SAÎU·T [Sioot]. 89 145 147
  Sallustian Obelisk. 9 145
  SAMENTHU, 21. dyn. 110
  Sân [Tanis]. 145 146 149
  Sân Obelisks. 11 146
  San Giovanni in Laterano, church in Rome. 129
  Santa Maria Maggiore, church in Rome. 148
  Santa Maria Maggiore Obelisk. 9 134 148
  Santa Trinita dei Monte, church in Rome. 145
  SÂQANEKHTKHEPERURÂ, 18. dyn. 110
  SARÂANÂ, 11. dyn. 109
  Sardinians, tribe. 121
  Sarbut-el-Khedem, in the Sinaitic Peninsula. 9 146
  SA·T [Saïs]. 92 145 146
  SEBEK, god. 90 98 103 120 129 146 162
  SEBEKHOTEP I., II., III., IV., V., VI., VII., and VIII., 14. dyn. 109
  SEBEKKARÂ, 4. dyn. 109
  SEBEKNEFERURÂ, 12. dyn. 109
  _Sebeknophris_, 12. dyn. 109
  SEBEK-RÂ, god. 29 86 146
  Sebennytus. 111
  _Seberkheres_, 4. dyn. 109
  _Sebikhos_, 25. dyn. 110
  _Sebitikhos_, 25. dyn. 110
  SEKHET, goddess. 98 103 139 146 158
  SEKTI or SEKTET Boat, of Tum. 22 131 146
  SELQ, goddess. 98 114
  _Semempses_, 1. dyn. 109
  SEMENPTAH, 1. dyn. 109
  SENDA, 2. dyn. 109
  SENEFERKA, 7.-10. dyn. 109
  SENEFERKARÂ, 11. dyn. 109
  SENI·T [ESNEH]. 87 120 146
  _Sephres_, 5. dyn. 109
  SEQENENRÂ I., II., and III., 17. dyn. 110
  Serapeum, temple. 100
  Serapis, god. 94
  _Sesokhris_, 2. dyn. 109
  _Sesonkhis I._, _II._, _III._, and _IV._, 22. dyn. 110
  _Sesortasis I._, _II._, and _III._, 12. dyn. 109
  _Sesostris_ [Seti I.]. 147
  SET, god. 87 125 126 138 146 147 157 160
  _Sethenes_, 2. dyn. 109
  _Sethnekhthes_, 19. dyn. 110
  _Sethos I._ and _II._, 19. dyn. 110
  SETÎ I., 19. dyn. 6 9 86 87 88 110 117 121 127 128 131 133 137 143 144
      145 147 148
  SETÎ II., 19. dyn. 110
  SETNEKHT, 19. dyn. 110
  Sevênêh [Syêne]. 149
  Severus, Roman emperor. 111
  Sextus, Roman name. 94
  SEZES, 3. dyn. 109                                                {201}
  SHABAKA, 25. dyn. 110
  SHABATAKA, 25. dyn. 110
  SHAKALUSHA [Sicilians], tribe. 121
  Shamy and Damy, colossi of Thebes. 153
  Sharutana (Sharudana) [Sardinians], tribe. 121
  Shekh-abd-el-Qurnah [Thebes]. 132
  Shepherd Kings [Hyksos]. 92 146 147
  SHEPSESKAF, 4. dyn. 109
  SHEPSESKARÂ, 5. dyn. 109
  SHESHENQ I., II., III., and IV., 22. dyn. 110
  Sheshonq I., 22. dyn. 132
  Shishak, 22. dyn. 110
  SHU, god. 156
  Sicily. Sicilians. 10 108 121
  Silsilis. 86 128 147
  Sinai, Mount. 146
  Sinaitic Peninsula. 1 4 9 11 135 146 147
  Sion House Obelisk. 10 95 147
  Sioot. 89 145 147
  _Sisires_, 5. dyn. 109
  Sixtus V., Pope. 121 129 148 153
  _Smendes_, 21. dyn. 110
  SNEFRU, 4. dyn. 109 133
  Somali Coast, in Africa. 122
  _Sophris_, 4. dyn. 109
  _Soris_, 4. dyn. 109
  Soughton Hall Obelisk. 11 147
  Sphinx, the Great. 121 122 148
  Staten Island, N. Y. 44
  Strabo, Greek geographer. 120 129
  Strassburg, in Germany. 118
  Stuart, Villiers, traveler. 2 148
  Sûan [Syene]. 149
  Sublime Porte. 53 148
  Suez. 135 146
  Suez Canal. 40 126 133 148
  SUN·T [Syene]. 24 86 101 148 149
  _Suphis_, 4. dyn. 109
  SUTEKH, god. 126 146
  Syene. 5 13 16 23 24 36 82 86 101 108 139 141 148 149
  Syria. Syrians. 36 114 117 126 127 131 133 137 144 145 147 148 149

  Tacitus, Roman name. 94
  TA-EN-TA-RER·T [Denderah]. 88 116 149
  TAHARQA, 25. dyn. 110
  TAHER, 30. dyn. 111
  Takelot I. and II., 22. dyn. 110
  _Takelothis I._ and _II._, 22. dyn. 110
  TA MEHÎ·T [Lower Egypt]. 90
  Tanis. 4 11 45 92 110 145 146 149 154
  _Tankheres_, 5. dyn. 109
  _Tarakheutæ_, embalmers. 134
  TA-RER·T [Denderah]. 117
  Tarîm, mountain. 80
  TA-RU-ÂU·T [Troy in Egypt]. 151
  TA-SHETI [Fayoom]. 90
  TATHUNEN, name of Ptah. 149
  TAÛR·T, goddess. 98
  _Tearkhos_, 25. dyn. 110
  Tel-Basta [Bubastis]. 92 105 149
  Tel-el-Amarna. 29 89 96 149
  Tell-Mahrê, in Syria. 117
  Tentyra [Denderah]. 117
  _Teos_, 30. dyn. 111
  TERÎNUS [Trajan]. 122
  TETA, 1. dyn. 109
  TETA, 3. dyn. 109
  TETA, 6. dyn. 109
  Thebes. 2 3 4 9 10 11 16 23 29 48 49 50 53 55 56 57 59 60 75 76 77 78 87
      88 89 95 96 97 99 100 109 110 112 117 118 119 127 129 130 131 132 133
      143 149 153 176
  THEMESQU [Damascus]. 115
  THENI·T [THINIS]. 89 120 150
  Theodosius the Great, emperor. 102 111
  THIÎ, queen 18. dyn. 101
  Thinis. 89 108 109 119 150
  This [Thinis]. 150
  Thoth, god. 49 56 57 75 97 98 115 150 151 158 159 161 190
  Thothmes I., 18. dyn. 5 9 10 110 127 150 151
  Thothmes II., 18. dyn. 6 110 131 150
  Thothmes III., 18. dyn. viii 6 7 9 10 19 31 35 36 37 38 46 47 48 49 50 52
      53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 75 76 77 78 82 96 101 110 115 117 122
      127 129 131 132 133 137 138 150 153 179 190
  Thothmes IV., 18. dyn. 6 9 19 96 110 129 151                      {202}
  Tiberius, Roman emperor. 102 111
  Tigris, river in Asia. 36 133
  Titus, Roman emperor. 111. Name. 104
  _Tosertasis_, 3. dyn. 109
  _Tosorthros_, 3. dyn. 109
  Trajan, Roman emperor. 102 111
  Troja, in Asia Minor. 151
  Troja, in Egypt. 91 151
  Troy, in Asia Minor. 126 151
  Troy, in Egypt. 91 151
  TUM, god. 22 27 28 29 46 51 53 56 57 58 67 75 76 77 90 98 102 123 131 133
      146 147 151 189
  TUMTÎNES [Domitian]. 117
  TURA [Troy in Egypt]. 91 151
  Turin, in Italy. 104
  Turkey. Turkish. 53 113 148
  TURSHA [Etruscans], tribe. 121
  TUTÂNKHAMEN, 18. dyn. 110
  _Tuthmosis I._, _II._, _III._, and _IV._, 18. dyn. 110

  ÛAHABRÂ, 26. dyn. 110
  _Uaphris_, 26. dyn. 110
  ÛAZNES, 2. dyn. 109
  ÛAZ-ÛR [Mediterranean Sea]. 131
  UNAS, 5. dyn. 109
  Unger, historian. 108
  United States. 10 41 44 82 83
  Upper Egypt. 2 3 30 31 48 52 53 54 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68
      69 70 72 75 76 77 78 84 89 93 94 95 96 97 99 103 104 106 107 111 113
      114 116 117 118 119 120 122 127 128 129 132 133 135 136 137 138 139
      140 141 142 144 147 148 149 150 151 152 161 162 168 181 185 187
  Urban VIII., Pope. 103
  _Usaphais_, 1. dyn. 109
  USAR [Osiris], god. 138
  ÛRSARKEN [Osarkon I.]. 38 72 96 138 175
  USERENRÂ or RÂNUSER, 5. dyn. 93 109
  USERENRÂ, 11. dyn. 109
  USERKAF, 5. dyn. 109
  _Userkheres_, 5. dyn. 109
  USERTESEN I., 12. dyn. 5 9 11 36 91 103 109 123 152
  USERTESEN II., 12. dyn. 109 119
  USERTESEN III., 12. dyn. 109
  US or US·T [Thebes]. 48 49 50 53 55 56 59 87 96 149 153 176

  Vanderbilt, W. H. 40 41 44 45 83
  Vatican, in Rome. 153
  Vatican Obelisk. 9 153
  Velletri, in Italy. 104 135
  Venus, goddess. 117 123
  Veranian Obelisk. 103
  Verus, Roman emperor. 111
  Vespasian, Roman emperor. 111
  Villa Albani, near Rome. 93
  Villa Celimontana, in Rome. 153
  Villa Mattei, in Rome. 153
  Villa Mattei Obelisk. 10 153
  Vocal Memnon. 96 112 153

  Wâdi Nasb, in the Sinaitic Peninsula. 135
  Wanstead, near London, England. 154
  Wanstead Obelisk. 11 154
  Washington, D. C. 18
  Wilkinson, Egyptologist. 14 108 154
  Wilson, Erasmus, professor. 95

  Xerxes I., 27. dyn. 110
  Xois, city in the Delta. 109

  Ya`mer-ben-Shaddâd, Arabic name. 80 154

  ZAHI, Asiatic tribe. 101
  ZÂN·T [Tanis]. 92 149 154
  ZAZAÎ, 3. dyn. 109
  ZESER, 3. dyn. 109
  ZESERTETA, 3. dyn. 109
  Zoëga, archæologist. 11 100 154



NOTES.

 [1] For a full account of the removal of the obelisk and everything
     connected with it, the reader is referred to the admirable book of the
     late Commander Gorringe, entitled: _Egyptian Obelisks_. New York,
     1882.

 [2] This is the so-called "shield-name", the heraldic motto or device of
     the Pharaoh, occurring in many variations on the obelisk.

 [3] The two diadems referred to are 1) the crown surmounted by an Uræus
     snake or cobra, symbolizing the king's power over life and death, and
     2) the crown with the vulture--usually worn by goddesses and
     queens--to proclaim him the "nourisher" or "protector" of his people.

 [4] This is the longest of any Egyptian cartouche, and is written in two
     vertical columns. It stands for the second cartouche given on page 36.

 [5] The last hieroglyphs of the two columns of the cartouche form the
     regal name: THOTH-MES.

 [6] The custom of erecting obelisks in pairs in front of the gates of
     temples has already been alluded to on page 20 (cf. the picture).

 [7] The gold-metal mentioned here may have been only an alloy of copper
     and gold. Some think that it was the _electrum_ of the ancients, which
     was an alloy of silver and gold.

 [8] This passage is supplied from the London Obelisk.

 [9] This was a festival celebrated every thirty years, also called the
     festival of the trentenary cycle. The real meaning of these highly
     important festivals is not yet fully understood.

[10] This passage is totally destroyed and indecipherable.

[11] [glyphs] is an abbreviated form for [glyphs] QA "_to lift up, raise_";
     therefore literally: "who has raised the crown".

[12] The white crown was that of Upper Egypt, which was then the most
     important part of the empire and the seat of government (cf. page 31).

[13] This term may also be translated according to Dümichen "Horus of the
     golden necklace". This necklace [glyphs] was the usual mark of
     distinction for valor in battle, and it was the king's prerogative to
     bestow it on his chiefs. Horus, the avenger of his father Osiris, is
     the Mars of Roman mythology. The whole expression, therefore, means
     "the valiant hero".

[14] USER-MÂ-RÂ-SOTEP-EN-RÂ is the royal or divine name of the "Pharaoh of
     the Oppression", which signifies: _the Sun, mighty in Truth, chosen of
     the Sun_.

[15] AMEN-MER-RÂ-MESES-SU is the family name of the same Pharaoh, or his
     name as prince before he ascended the throne, and signifies: _the
     beloved of Amen, the Sun, who begets himself_.

[16] ATEN is another name of the sun-god Râ. This deity was represented as
     the sun giving forth rays, each of which terminated in a hand holding
     the sign [glyphs] (ÂNKH) "_life_"). The picture on page 30 will make
     this plain.

[17] KHEPERA, literally "_the Creator_", is another name of the sun-god and
     represents the invisible sun of night. The beetle ([glyphs]) or scarab
     was sacred to this deity, whose picture is given on page 28.

[18] _i. e._ like the ever-rising sun (cf. page 28).

[19] MÂ is the Egyptian goddess of Truth.

[20] PTAH-TATHUNEN is a name of Ptah as the chief deity of Memphis in Lower
     Egypt. Cf. the Glossary.







End of Project Gutenberg's The New York Obelisk, by Charles E. Moldenke

